-- Page 5 --
THE PREFACE
Tue external facts connected with the Rosy Cross on the
historical side were set out with no inconsiderable accuracy,
so far as general lines are concerned, in a work which I
devoted to the subject at the beginning of my literary
life; and it appears even to have remained as a general
source of reference since its date of publication in the year
1887. It was impossible at the period that I should have
carried the research further, as—for example—into the
inward history of Rosicrucian symbolism. ‘There were
seals upon the gates leading into such realms, and they
were not to be broken by the simple lettered student.
As such he depended solely on the resources of ascertainable
or public facts, and on the guidance of precursors who had
entered the region of debate, though after a certain point
most presumed authorities had to be set aside. The book
has been long out of print, and as since then it has been
given me to open many doors at which I had scarcely
knocked in 1887, while others were unknown, I feel that
the time has come to take up the old subject and to treat
it after a new manner, as one who can speak now not
only with different and much further knowledge on the
internal side but as one also who has travelled various
paths belonging to its sacred world. In the present volume
I shall be concerned therefore with the Rosy Cross
intus et foris scripta, like some of its own books. The present
era seems to offer a favourable opportunity for a record
of this kind and for the experiment which it involves,
Vv

-- Page 6 --
The Preface

the latter perhaps especially, as beyond the merely historical
horizon my work indicates another road which it is possible
for a zealous student to follow, supposing that he is pre-
pared properly ; and thoughtful minds are turning in the
direction to which it leads. ‘There are listeners at many
corners, many postulants and tarriers in the courtyards and
approaches of the Hidden Sanctuaries, seeking to go further
than any open books can lead them. I have tried there-
fore to hold up a hermit’s lamp among the shadows of
the present volume for the guidance of a few at least.

There is a great spiritual symbolism which has come down
to us through several houses of tradition ; it is not, I think,
communicated in a plenary sense by any one school: it is
rather the harmony of all. As if with Pentecostal tongues,
it speaks to those who can hear, but according to the law
of symbolism, and always therefore within its proper veils.
The explanation is that Deus ex machina sua non descendit,
and hence the Secret of the Mysteries is a secret of life,
which offers itself only to that which is vital in the Candi-
date. The touchstone is always life, and for this reason
antiquity per se is not a test of value—as the necessity of
many occasions has caused me to affirm previously. There
would be no Hidden Mystery of the Rosy Cross if it had
not suffered successive transmutations, adjusting a change
of vesture to a new heart of motive. I think indeed that it
has died many times and has been as often reborn, ever a
little “ nearer to the heart’s desire.” If it doth not yet
appear what it shall be—because of possible exaltations
to come—I know at least of one sanctuary wherein it has
assumed a tobe of glory and the vestments of a royal
Presthood. With these words I commend the spiritual

ystery of the Rosy Cross—on its more withdrawn side—
Meant, who seek amidst Instituted Rites for a way of

ay of God in symbolism.
vi

-- Page 7 --
The Preface

To that much larger section whose concern is with the
Instituted Mysteries in their historical aspects only, I
would say that the Mystic City of their Dedication has
had many keepers ; that its Holy Sanctuary has been filled too
often in the past with money-changers and sellers of doves,
with wicked priests and false prophets of so-called occult
science ; and that houses of folly or ill-fame have been
built in the style and title of the House of the Holy Spirit.
Vel Sanctum invenit, vel sanctum facit is a descriptive maxim
concerning the science of adeptship, but the Hidden Temple
of the Rosy Cross seems to have attained the holiness of
a Mystic Sanctuary rather than to have begun as such.
I have not come forward as its indiscriminate apologist ;
the dark and the bright side of the whole research are here
exhibited, and I offer both to students of the Mysteries
in their external aspects as a contribution in full to a very
curious part of their concern. There is of necessity much
which remains to be said on the inward or vital side, but
I cherish an honourable hope that I have put to flight
a great cohort of fantastic shapes, bodied forth by the false
imagination of those who have used the Rosicrucian
Mystery as a wand to conjure with, or have conceived false
notions concerning it which they have rendered in terms
of certitude, without knowing their subject. Perhaps
there has never been a realm of inquiry which has been
colonised to such an extent by fools and knaves of specula-
tion. If there has been one other it is that which adjoins
with no intervening boundary—I mean Emblematic Free-
masonry. I have done something, almost simultaneously,
for the clearance of that region, which is much wider and
more difficult in visitation because the cloud of false
informers therein are wearing its own liveries, while those
who have exploited the Rosicrucian field, displaying its
characteristic devices and making claims on knowledge at

vii

-- Page 8 --
The Pr

first hand, have been always f
who seek to explain it histo
their own unreasoned terms.
In conclusion to these pref
that my book on the Mystery
object in view, being a fairly «
of the problem which it has
delineation, so far as it can be
more important things which |

efuce
ew in comparison with those
rically or philosophically on

atory words, it will be seen
of the Rosy Cross has a dual
‘xhaustive and critical survey
presented to history and a
attempted, of certain much
abide within or behind it.

A. E. Warre.

-- Page 9 --
CONT

Tue Prerace . .
EXPLANATION OF THE PLATES CONTAI

CHAP’
MYTHICAL ROSICRI

Adventitious and inherent difficulties
the Rosy Cross—Analogies in tk
Freemasonry—First Manifestatio
which lay behind it—Its Claims
speculations and reveries—A drea
Comte de Falkenstein—A my
Agrippa and his Alchemical Soc:
Dr. John Dee—Facts and Inventi
Curiosities of Baconian criticism
Implicits of false ascriptions—O
all the Reveries and Inventions

CHAP
MILITIA CRUCIFt

Varieties of miscellaneous speculation:
—The Story of Simon Studion-
Brethren—Their Rosicrucian resi
Simon Studion—How it offers a «
—Studion may also have marric
bolism—The crux of the whole
of Studion’s work on Prophecy—
his MS.—A reasonable conclus
present research—An American i

CHAP
ALCHEMISTS A)

Claim on the part of original Rose-
sophical and theosophical pos
alchemy—Jacob Béhme—Trace:
ciations in Germany—The place

1B.

‘ENTS

NED IN THIS Work : .

rER I
JCIAN PRECURSORS

of research into the subject of
ie early history of Emblematic
n of the Order and as to that
in respect of origin—Exoteric
m about Raymund Lully—The
thos concerning Paracelsus—
ety—An alleged dedication of
ons concerning Francis Bacon—
and dreams of astral skrying—
f that which remains over after

TER II
ERA EVANGELICA

—A Case which stands by itself
~The Evangelical Cross-bearing
emblances—The Naomerria of
concrete fact as a starting-point
'd the Rose and Cross in sym-
subject—The present location
-The deponents who examined
ion to be drawn from the
avention of 1905. . :

‘ER III
ND MYSTICS

Cross documents—Their philo-
tion—Position in respect of
; of anterior mystical asso-
of Heinrich Khunrath among

PAGE

X1X

35

-- Page 10 --
Con:

precursors of the Rosy Cros
Gutmann——Mendacities concer:
Travels of Nicolas Barnaud—Be
on a Heavenly Quest—Count Bor
Croix—The Diary of Hosea Lu:
of this chapter .

CHAPT
SYMBOLISM OF THI

An initial critical distinction—The F
pagan myth—The Rose in H
Christian Legend—The Rose a
Mary the Mother—Tue Romani
Dante—The so-called Rose of Ki
Maier—The Cross in Alchemy
_Fludd—Conjunction of Rose anc
of Luther—The witness of Her:
Cross—Later explanation of th
Order—The Rose-Cross symbo!
Fludd—Present theosophy of the

CHAPT
FAMA FRATERNI1

Position of the Research summarised-
tions—Dates and editions of the
in manuscript—Testimony of Ad:
Ecuo Frarerniratis and certain ¢
ReForMaTiIon summarised—Its di
follows it—Story of the Fama Fx
tions on the text—Languages in
Tomb of Christian Rosy Cross-
modern occult reveries

CHAPT]
CONFESSIO FRATER!

Things left over by the Fama—Biblic
introductory matter—Unfulfilled
Conressio and its Reasons of Pu
Papal spirit and foolish declama
poned Promises to Applicants—S
Christian Rosy Cross—Failure of
ambitious claims of the supposed |

x

tents

s—Valentine Weigel—Agidius
ning Faustus Socinus—The
nedictus Figulus—A Hermetist
abastes as a Knight of the Rose-
<—Conclusion on the findings

ER IV
: ROSE AND CROSS

‘ose in symbolism—Vestiges in
oly Scripture—The Rose in
nd Shekinah—The Rose and
cE OF THE Rose—The Rose of
1unrath—The Rose of Michael
—-Cross-symbolism of Robert
1 Cross—The Cross and Rose
ildry—Maier on the Rose and
¢ name and symbol of the
| according to the mind of

symbol—General conclusion .
ER V
ATIS RWC

~Beginning of official publica-
Fama—lIts previous circulation
1m Haselmeyer—Testimony of
atly Letters—Tur Universan
stinction from the text which
ATERNITATIS—Critical observa-
which it was published—The
~Follies and extravagance of

SR VI
NITATIS RUC.

graphy of the Conressto—Its
promises of the Fama—The
‘pose and Intention—Its anti-
tion arising therefrom—Post-
ophistic Books—Birth-date of

the Conressto to support the
Order. . :

PAGE

55

85

113

143

-- Page 11 --
Con

CHAPT

THE CHEMIC,

The Macnum Orus in Romance—Th
bration—The text and its place
Books of the Marriage—Their s1
German occult mind—Its meani:
Origin of the text

CHAPT!]
AUTHORSHIP OF THE

Johannes Valentinus Andree—His lite:
—The author of Nuprim@ Cuymic
Its progeny of monsters—Its yp
Possible interpolation of the tex
An alternative speculation—Cc
potheses—Andrez and Studion
Rosicrucian Manifestoes as a plan
this view—Position of the Occul
of Godfrey Arnold—Tracts again
Turris Baset—Evidence of My
to the Third Book—The Dialogu
the Rosy Cross not built by An
the movement—How again we a1
The C..R..C.. legend and that

on Andree

CHAP
DEVELOPMENT OF ROS

Reception of the first Manifestoes—
and Books of the Period—App
Hidden Brotherhood and its Hi
Rosy Cross—Accusing Voices—
Germany—The Ecuo Frarerx
Other Claimants to Initiation—]
parius Cuymicus—A Cloud |
Order—The Case of Libavius—
Schweighardt—Florentinus de
Isaiah sub Cruce—Metamorphos
the hands of later Apologists az
tions . . . .

tents

ER VII

1L NUPTIALS

e Marriage and its date of cele-
-in the literature—The Seven
tory at large—Its effect on the
ag unfolded in commentaries—

“R VII
CHEMICAL NUPTIALS

‘ary output—His Autobiography
we—Described as a Ludibrium—
ublication many years after—
t—Possible concealed motive—
mparative value of two hy-
—Andree and Tobias Hess—
ned hoax—Reasons for rejecting
: Sciences at the period—Thesis
st the Rosy Cross by Andrez—
THOLOGIA CuRisTIaNA—Preface
es of Menippus—The House of
drez—His probable relation to
e referred back to NaomErria—
of Raymund Lully—Conclusion

‘ER Ix
ICRUCIAN LITERATURE

Clash of Opinion in Pamphlets
lications for Admission to the
oly House—Dedications to the
Champions of the Cause in
rratis—Julianus de Campis—
‘LucipaRiIus Major and Exuci-
of Notions—Religion of the
-Hostile works—Menapius and
Valentia—Irenezus Agnostus—
is of the Rosicrucian subject in
id in presumed Official Publica-

i

PAGE

158

182

215

-- Page 12 --
Contents
CHAPTER X
ENGLISH ROSICRUCIANISM
; PAGE
A Memorable Shrine at Bearsted—The Church and Manor House—
The Tomb of Robert Fludd—A great Protagonist of the Rosy
Cross in England~—Characteristics of his Writings—His Quest
in Philosophy and Medicine—His Travels abroad—His first
Published Works—Apotocia CompenpiariA and ‘TRacTatus
Arotocrticus—Their Defence of the Order—The Rosy Cross
and King James I of England—The Snort Dectaration of
Robert Fludd—His Address to the Order—Tracratus-THEOLoGo-
Puitosopuicus—The Secret Tradition and the Rosy Cross—Its
Treasures of Heaven—The spiritualisation of the Order by Fludd
—Hostile criticisms of Mersenne—The reply in Sorni@ cum
Moria CertaMen—Its momentous additamentum in the SummuM
Bonum of Joachim Fritz—Its defence of the Brotherhood~
The Hidden Church of the Rosy Cross—A Voice speaking from
within—The House of Wisdom—Heads of a Rosicrucian Letter—
Whether the author of Summum Bonu belonged to the Order—
Mersenne and Gassendus—Fludd answers Gassendus in Cravis
Puirosopnim er AtcHymim® Fruppan@—Last Words on the
Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross—Its transmutation completed by
Fludd—His mystical understanding of Alchemy—Continental
indications that he did not stand alone—Whether he was drawn
within the Initiated Circle—His position respecting the Official
Churches—An alleged Rosicrucian Jewel of Robert Fludd—
False Tepresentations concerning it—A Note on the Rosy Cross
and its pretended offer to the White King . . . 271
CHAPTER XI
A GREAT GERMAN ALCHEMIST
Bi . . . ;
irth of Michael Maier—His career in brief outline—His religious
position The Holy Eucharist according to the mind of Maier—
His first publication—Thesis of Arcana ARCANISSIMA—His visi
to England—Its alleged and real purpose—Wh vecame
acquainted c P ether he became
‘ hee ‘Personally with Robert Fludd—His return to Germany
—fudhcation of Lusus § _ :
activities of 1617—Maier’s interve ne in Re described —Other
SILENTIUM Post CLaMoREs—A defe ce f Rogcracian debate
of its thesis—Sympora Aurrz M we The Cale ean heads
ENSE—Th
Poss preceded by other Colleges—How weet ia the Rosy
ear of the Order—On certain contradictions i he Fag nne
location of its Hi ictions in the Fama—The
Ocat its Hidden House—The L, d .
lication of Tuemrs Aurra—lI gene of WR oC -—Pub-
therhood—Further intimati ts study of the Laws of the Bro-
ations concerning the Hidden House—
Xi

-- Page 13 --
Contents
PAGE
Death of Maier—A note on some other writings—The posthumous
tract entitled Unysszs—Its additamenta, including the Editor’s
Preface—Cotioquium Ruoposrauroticum—Whether Maier’s
zeal for the Order bore fruit to himself—An answer in Ecuo
Coxttoouii—Promise of Fruit to come—These texts were
published originally before the death of Maier—Note on
Benedict Hilarion and a new spirit in the German Rosy Cross—
Decraratory Canons issued in the name of the Order . . 310
CHAPTER XII
LATER CONTINENTAL HISTORY
Some further Apologies and Attacks—A Warninc To Rosicrucian
Vermin—The Wootcomser’s Fair—Brothers of the Pit—A
Finger-post for Wanderers—The Rosy Cross in Holland—Peter
Mormius—His Arcana SecretissiMa—Precedent Inquiries by
the Dutch Court of Justice—Mormius and Christian Rose—The
Rosy Cross at the Hague—The story of Orvius—Doubts and diffi-
culties concerning him—Madathanus and his Gotp—en AcE—
Intimations of various Groups using the style and title of the
Order—The author of Patma TRruMPHALIs—Garasse and Kircher
—Inventions concerning Campanella and Comenius—Subsidence
of the subject in Germany—The position in retrospect—A pre-
tended Rosicrucian Proclamation in France—Scurrilous pam-
phlets of the period—Descartes and Leibnitz . . . . 340
CHAPTER XIII
THE AWAKENING IN ENGLAND
A point of Speculation respecting Robert Fludd—The Acception at
Masons’ Hall—The sleep of the Rosy Cross in England—The
Legend of Elias Ashmole—Its contradictions and incoherence—
The fact remains that he represented the mind of the Rosy Cross
in some of its aspects—William Backhouse as his Father in
Alchemy—A consideration of this reputed Master—Examination
of the Preface to THrarrum Cuymicum Brrrannicum and of the
Way To Buiss—Conclusion respecting Ashmole—The case of
Thomas Vaughan—Dedication of his first Tract—Delineation in
full of his contribution to the Rosicrucian subject in England—
His recurring denial of membership—Occult mendacities and
ignorance on this question—His Preface to the English Fama and
Conressio—His extracts from unknown Adepts—Comparison
with a Rosicrucian Letter in Summum Bonum—A further com-
munication from the Brotherhood in Lumen ve Lumine—The
Rosy Cross and the Mystic Body of Adeptship—Thomas Vaughan
and the myth of Leo Taxil’s Diana—Concerning Theodosius
Xill

-- Page 14 --
Cont

Verax and Theophilus Calnatus—
—His contributions to the matter
A Sheaf of Gleanings—His Inrar
Turomacia, Wise Man's Crown z
Conclusion on John Heydon—His
Smart and the so-called Rudd MS

CHAPTE

GERMAN ROSICRUCIANISM IN

A Space of Silence in the occult Heave:
—His work on the Philosophical St
nity—Classified consideration of
Initiate—Ceremony of Reception-
large—Probable Status of the Ord
—Object in view—Other rumou
Philalethes—An Eastern Empero:
intervention of Jesuits

CHAPTE

THE RITUAL AND !}

Evolution of Masonic and Rosicrucian (
cedure in the Operative Craft—R
Order—Rise of Emblematic Freen
Ritual—Absence of an Emblemati:
Entered Apprentice and the Novi
Transformation in the procedure
and Rites—Rosicrucian claims on
Masonic Rose-Croix—Its reflect
Eighteenth Degree as Rosicrucian |
ments and variations—Spurious
The Rosy Cross and the Royal O
or Unknown Philosopher—The Ro:
—lIts reflection from the Rosicruci
Masonry—Widespread tradition o1

CHAPTE
THE ROSY AND

Continental growth of Ritual in Mase
the German Rosy Cross—The Ref
of Foundation or Traditional Hist
Tradition—Its claim on the Origi:

xn

ents

The Knaveries of John Heydon
of the Rosy Cross in England—
LIBLE Ax1oMATA, Hoty Guipe,
ind Harmony oF THE WorLD—
autobiographical moods—Peter

S.

R XIV

THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY

1—Advent of Sigmund Richter
one—New Laws of the Frater-
_ these—The Pledge of the
—Inferences from the Laws at
er marked by their publication
rs—Sendivogius and Eirenzus
- of the Rosy Cross—Alleged

IR XV
MASONIC PERIOD

3rades—Pre-Grand Lodge pro-
itual vestiges in the Hermetic
1asonry—An Advent of Life in
element in Old Charges—The
ce of the Rosy Cross—A great
f the Order—A day of Grades
Masonic Origins—Rise of the
ions from the Order—The
oy fact and claim—Its develop-
versions—Rite of Memphis—
rder—The Degree of Sublime
e-Croix and the Restored Word
an claim to possess the Key of
1 this subject

R XVI
SOLDEN CROSS

nic Orders—A new Epoch ir
ormation of 1777—Its Legend
ory—lIts relation to the Secret
1 of Freemasonry—The Quali-

r

PAGE

363

402

417

-- Page 15 --
Contents

PAGE
fication required of Candidates—Explanation of Craft Symbolism
—Grades of the Rosicrucian Rite—Forms of Application for
Candidates and Preliminary Tests—Variants of the Grade of
Zelator—The Grade of Theoreticus—Procedure in that of
Practicus—The Grade of Philosophus—The Ceremony of Recep-
tion in the Grade of Adeptus Minor—Higher Grades of the Rite
—The kind of instruction imparted to Zelatores and Theoretici—
Processes conveyed to Adepti—Inference that the Reformed Order
was concerned with the Physical Work of Alchemy—The Mystery
of the Eighth Grade—A French Adept Ritual—Its procedure and
the Catechism attached thereto—Its relation to the Reformed
Rite in Germany—Publication of the German Szcret Sympots—
The Textual Content—-A Study of the Pictorial Symbols—The
Reflections from Jacob Béhme—Dr. Franz Hartmann and his
edition of the Secret Symsors—Characteristics of the English

translation . . . . . : . : - 439

CHAPTER XVII
SAINT-GERMAIN AND CAGLIOSTRO

The Invisibles in Romance—A contribution to the History of the
Subject in France of the Eighteenth Century—Apparitions and
Occultations of Saint-Germain—Evidence of the Mitchell Papers
—Discoveries of Mrs. Cooper-Oakley in the French Record Office
—Saint-Germain and the Court of Versailles—Possibility of his
unofficial Political Mission—The light in which he is presented—
Other Records and Testimonies—Chronology of his European
wanderings—Date and circumstances of his Death—The Growth
of Fable and Invention—The Facts which remain—An Estimate
concerning him—His Masonic Activities—His alleged connection
with the Rosy Cross—Reveries of Modern Theosophy—The Case
of Count Cagliostro—-His Rosicrucian initiation according to the
Marquis du Luchet—Comedy of this Narrative—Cagliostro and
Egyptian Mysteries—Rosicrucian Grade of Martines de Pasqually
—Conclusion as regards the Rosy Cross in France on the eve of

Revolution . . : : . : : . . . 483

CHAPTER XVIII
FRATRES LUCIS
The Rosy Cross and Frederic William II—Bischoffswerder and Wéllner
—An initiated King—Politics and the Rosy Cross—Schrepfer—
Alleged Last Schism in the Order—The Initiated Brothers of
Asia—Fratres Lucis and Knights of Light—Mrs. Cooper-Oakley’s
Manuscript—Records in the Petrograd Imperial Library—
Degrees of the Order—Qualifications of Candidates—Preliminary
XV

-- Page 16 --
Conte

Pledge—Knight-Novice of the Th
course—Masonic Explanation—Kni
—Knight-Novice of the Seventh ¥
Degree, or that of Levite—The Fift
Installation of a Provincial Head
Hidden Churches of Asia—Further
of Asia—Baron Hans Heinrich Eck
Expulsion by the Rosy Cross—T!
Freemasonry—The Collection :
Alleged Perpetuation of Fratres I

CHAPTE]

THE ROSY CROS

Concerning Martinism in Russia—Russi
nisation from Germany—Connecti
—Nicholas Novikoff—Elaguin an
J. G. Schwarz-—A Russian Charter
of Procedure—Teaching of the
Instruction—The Rite in its We
Directory established—Its Gover
rated by the Rite—Predominanc
Rumours concerning the Sixth
Russian Masonry under the Wing
Imprisonment of Novikoff—His
Interdict on all Secret Rites—Ve
of Later Days

CHAPT!
ENGLISH ROSICRUCIANISM OF

Woman and the Rosy Cross—Evidenc
The case of Sigismund Bacstrom:
—The Comte de Chazal—Recorc
Historical Claim—Concern in Phy
Official Religion—Christian Asr
Reception of Women—Inferen:
Particulars concerning Comte de
MSS.—The Diary oF a Rosicr
ence from the Bacstrom story—
study of the Rainsford Papers—C
Brotherhood in Manchester—So
Its uncertain and clouded Origin
nesses—Scheme of Degrees—Frir

x

nts

ird Year—Its Historical Dis-
ght-Novice of the Fifth Year
var—Procedure of the Fourth
h Degree of Priesthood—The
_S,aws of the Order—The
concerning Initiated Brothers
+ und Eckhoffen—His alleged
.e Seven Grades of Mystical
ititled Der SIGNATSTERN-—

uucis .

2 XIX

S IN RUSSIA

1 and the Rosy Cross—Its colo-
on with the Strict Observance
4d Real Masonry—Advent of
of the Rosy Cross—The Rules
Order—Vestiges of Mystical
rking—Death of Schwarz—A
ning Laws—Degrees incorpo-
: of the Theoretical Degree—
—Some additional Points—
of the Rosy Cross—Arrest and
Release and After Life—An
stiges of the Order in Russia

wR XX
THE NINETEENTH CENTURY

es of an independent Branch—
—The Rosy Cross in Mauritius
is of the Bacstrom Admission—
sical Alchemy—The Order and
ects—Further concerning the
es from the Records—Secret
Chazal—Facts about Bacstrom
ucIAN PuiLosopHer—An infer-
The Baal Shem of London—A
sodfrey Higgins—A Rosicrucian
cietas Rosicruciana in Anglia—
—Credibility of the Early Wit-
olity of their Pretence

v1

PAGE

503

529

548

-- Page 17 --
Con:

CHAPT!

A MODERN ROSI

Particulars concerning Masonic F
struction of the Red Cross of C
F. G. Irwin—Third in a Succes:
for Rites—His circle devises a n
And refers it to Thomas Vaugha
—Heads of a large MS.—Idea o!
in 1874—A version of its His
Qualifications of Postulants—Ce:
The Candidate becomes a True
Great Names—The Final Discou
—Jupces 1n Isrart—Revelations
Hermetic Students of the G. D.
Grades and of others beyond—
Warrants—Story of the allege:
Date—Speculations respecting tl

CHAPTI
A KABALISTIC ORDER

A Preliminary Excursus on French (
Kabalism—Black Magic—French
Cross—The Occult Revival of 1§
Papus—Foundation of L’Ordre ]
Its first President as Grand Mast
de Guaita—The Sar Péladan—H
Rose-Croix—Death of De Guait
Papus as the third Grand Maste
Hopes—Interior Constitution of
solution in the Great War

CHAPTE

THE AMERICA

The Strange Story of Kelpius—Rosic
Their handbook or vwade-mect
HyperpuisicA—Its relation to thi
at Germantown—The cave-dwel
Theosophical Doctrine—Notior
alleged vestige of the Rosy Cro
century—The first Modern I
Paschal Beverley Randolph—Hov
—The Imperial Order of “R

b x

rents

ER XXI

CRUCIAN ORDER

actories of Degrees—Recon-
onstantine—Activities of Major
ion of Collectors—His Passion
ew Order of the Rosy Cross—
n—The text decides the Claim
' the Rosy Cross and its doings
tory—Doctrinal Instructions—
remonial of Secret Reception—
Priest—He is admitted in the
rse—Another curious invention
of the Soc. Ros.—An Order of
—The Isis-Urania Temple—Its
-The illusive Antiquity of its
1 Ciphers—Their approximate
1e Authorship .

R XXII
OF THE ROSE-CROIX

Jccult Movements—Alchemy—
detachment respecting the Rosy
85—An unfulfilled Prophecy of
<abbalistique de la Rose-Croix—
er—Literary Record of Stanislas
is inauguration of an alternative
a—Succession of F. C. Barlet-—
r—A Statement of Rosicrucian
the Order—lIts presumable Dis-

R XXIII
N ROSY CROSS

rucian Pilgrims to Philadelphia—
ym—Puysica, METAPHYSICA ET
> Secret SymBois—A settlement
ling of Kelpius—His medley of
is on the Second Advent—An
ss in America of the eighteenth
Yeponent—Tragical History of
v he founded a Rosicrucian Order
osicrucia’—Randolph on Rosi-

Vil

PAGE

568

585

-- Page 18 --
Con:

crucian History—His appeal to
Atlantis—His Rosicrucian Drean
F. B. Dowd as Grand Master—
Cross—The Dissolution of these Ac
in America—Its Origin and D
Foundations .

CHAPTE:
LAST DEVELOPMENT:

Of that which lies behind Rosicrucian
in Christian Times—Renovation |
the Christian zgis—Transformati
Transformation of Kabalism by
formation of Operative Masonry b
formation of the Rosy Cross—Sur
—Transformed Kabalism and t
Eucharistic Mystery in the Light
of Life in Mysticism—The Rosi
Transformation of Adeptship by
Rosy Cross and the Light of the
tion of Ritual into Life—The G
The Last Word of the Mysteries
subject

Appenpix: AppitionaL Expository |

Inpex

XVI

en tS

something pre-existent in Old
1-Book—Randolph’s Suicide—
His contribution to the Rosy
tivities—A Societas Rosicructana
evelopment—Other and later

R XXIV
3 OF THE MYSTERY

History—The Secret Tradition
of Old World Mysteries under
on of Chivalry by Romance—
Christian Scholarship—Trans>
y Speculative Masonry—Trans-
nmary outline of its Symbolism
he transformed Rosy Cross—
of the Rosy Cross—The Tree
crucian Path and Term—The
 Sanctity—The Light of the
World in Christ—The Transla-
reat Mystery of Attainment—
Final Conclusions on the whole

Novres .

PAGE

601

617
632

644

-- Page 19 --
EXPLANATION OF THE PLATES CONTAINED
IN THIS WORK
I, Frontispiece. Tur Goupen anp Rosy Cross, understood in the secret
circles as the Cosmic Cross of the Order, symbolising universal manifesta-
tion, with the manifested Christ in the centre as the power and the grace
of all things. The motto is: Ego sum flos campi et lilium convallium. This
emblem appears on the title-page of Genrrme Ficuren, issued at Altona
in 1785, and is characteristic of the theosophical spirit which permeates
the whole work. It was attached evidently to a ribbon or collar, and is
probably the reverse side of a Cross shewn in another plate, described as
of fine gold and said to have been worn by each Brother on his breast.
The inscription on the reverse is the well-known salutation of the Order
which was repeated on exposing the symbol: Benedictus Dominus Deus
noster qui dedit nobis signum. Beneath this inscription the signs of Mercury,
Venus, the Moon, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn are written about a six-pointed
star, having the Sun in its centre. On the uppermost arm of the Cross
are the words: Macisrer Jesus Curistus, Deus er Homo; the horizontal
arms bear the signs of the three Philosophical Principles; and on that
which is lowermost is inscribed : Frater Rose et Aurea Crucis, i.e. Brother
of the Rose and of the Golden Cross. The symbol illustrates the dedica-
tions of the Order at this period; but they were no new development,
peculiar to the eighteenth century: they were in evidence even at the
beginning and are characteristics of the present day more assuredly than
ever.
II, Tue Lasorarory or tHe Aucuemist, from AMPHITHEATRUM SAPIENTLE
‘Evsrn# of Heinrich Khunrath, 1609. The explanation of this impor-
tant symbolical design is given in my text, pp. 66, 67.
IH, Tue Gatz or Erernat Wispom, from the same, and the explanation
is at the same place.
IV. Tue Curist or Guory, from the same and the same text reference.
These three plates indicate the higher mind of German Alchemy on the
threshold of the Rosicrucian epoch, the last indicating that the Hermetic
Christology of the Order was derived from the antecedent period and was
developed rather than invented within the secret circle.
V. Rosa Cant. The Solar Rose is centred in the glory of the Sun, and
the Christ of Nazareth is centred in the celestial fower. From GEnxIme
XIX

-- Page 20 --
Explanation of the Plates
Ficuren, It is the Rosicrucian adaptation of Khunrath’s Christ of Glory,
and a footnote says that this Harmonial Image drawn from the Light of
Nature is made plain in the restoration of all things. In the deep under-
standing of Rosicrucian doctrine, the Rose is also the Soul and Christ is
the Indwelling Spirit. So is the Word made flesh by manifestation from
within the Soul, and in the marriage life of this union there is no distinction
between the Soul and the Word within the modes of realisation.
VI. Gop Known or THe Heart, from Gruetme Ficuren. The glorified
Christ seated at the right hand of God is represented as flowing into the
heart of man, which encompasses the worlds without and within, the old
word of the earthly night and the day of the new spirit. That which is
without is typified by the belt of the Zodiac, having the sun centred therein
But there is an inner light, as if of another sun or a sun within the san,
and it enshrines the Divine Hexagram. The words inscribed therein are:
genstern—=Morning Star, Saba(o)th and Punctus, understood as em-
blematic of the Christhood. That which is born in darkness must die on
the Cross of suffering. So is the man led back through a second birth to
me Hehe in Catt, Who is rest, peace, eternal life and the Heavenly King-
m. e old must go entirely. i
Christ becomes Anh: iB entirely The new creature is born of God and
ae Cipners or tHe CuemicaL Nurriazs, The first is found in the story
of che Fifth Day, when the Page of Christian Rosy Cross was leading him
castle, and was inscribed on an iron door opening on a “ sepulchre.”
(See my text, p. 172.) The reading is: ‘Here lies buried V: P j
woman who hath undone man “in fortune. the fair
blessing end indo} y a great man, both in fortune, honour,
tive wre decoder the we second occurs a few pages later in the narra-
es thus: “When the fruit of my tree shall b letel
melted, then will I awake and be the mother of. ki “ie caid to be
: ‘ .? It is said to b
written on a tablet behind the couch of Venu ° Tes bi :
referred to is descri *. ( ort ibid.) The tree
fruit 5 the obscure seas ane none wate ean ee forth oth
ciphers reproduce remarks of the Page— hich Tear ahem: Fou
introduction is mere bluff. A sli hal import ha oe ane thet
has been in my possession f sughtly imperfect key of these inscriptions
sentences is due to his skill in cryptoer i : 7 the decoding of the two
two other ciphers, each of a a e aphy. should add that there are
Sixth Day of the Nuptiats: b a hey meee we in the Fourth and
not been at the pains to seek it "MM. y demand another key, and I have
Cuymiscuz Hocuzerr has no real place Te ehe hig vot te Re Gun
stor
VIL Tas Heanerie Punuoe y of the Rosy Cross.
The motto is Dens bendiy honey SymBoutsep, from GEHEIME FicUREN.
concerning itself, being that in the ai rabore. The Magnet Stone testifies
nothing—meaning of things whi h belong ie which the seeker can effect
which draws upon the way of truth tho. oe ety, It is, godly love,
ose who seek God and wisdom. The
XxX

-- Page 21 --
Explanation of the Plates
Stone is symbolised as the dew of heaven and the fatness of earth, a fiery
water and an aqueous fire. It is not only near all things, but is even immanent
in all and is yet unknown. The counsel is therefore to fear God, to pray
and work in patience. It follows from these intimations that the Stone is
understood mystically ; but as in the allegories of Khunrath, its attainment
leads in some undemonstrable manner to the gift of the Physical Stone,
and the symbolism of the one is confused with that of the other, the Spiritual
Magnet being denominated also Hermaphrodite, Phcenix, Pelican, a Stone
which is not a Stone, Water and no Water. This terminology is familiar
in material alchemy. My purpose in reproducing the diagram is to shew
that the mind of the Rosy Cross at the end of the eighteenth century was
the mind of Khunrath two hundred years previously. Between the two
periods there is evidence that other alchemists leaned in the same direction.
It must be said that the symbolical design is not rendered fully intelligible
by the mass of letterpress which accompanies it. The dew and breath of
heaven descend upon a flower which represents the First Matter ; the Solar
rays are poured upon a Rose and those of the Moon upon a Lily; they
meet at the apex of the inverted triangle and issue therefrom as the Sap of
Sun and Moon, producing the three Philosophical Principles which generate
the elements, metals, minerals and planets. The Rose is the Rose of Sharon,
the Lily is that of Jehosaphat and the triangle is the Fount of Wonders.
IX. The Apocalyptic Lamb, reclining on the Book with Seven Seals and
encompassed by a radiant sun. From Genzime Ficuren. The message
is in the words of the Fama: Feheshuah mibi omnia, to which the letter-
press of the Diagram adds: Mea victoria in Cruce Rosea. Herein are the
grace and light of the Rosy Cross. The Scriptural references are to 1 Cor.
ii, I, 2, very loosely translated, and Aroc. I, 8: “Iam Alpha and Omega,
the First and the Last.” The valediction is: Deo Ommnipotenti sit laus,
honos et gloria in seculorum secula. Amen.
X. Tasuza Smaracpina Hermetis, from Geutimzt Ficuren. The in-
scription about the circle is the well-known Hermetic thesis that the Secret
Stone is found by exploring the depths of earth and by rectifying. The
rays of the Sun and Moon are poured into a chalice supported by the sign
of Mercury, and this rests upon a ring to which are fastened the ends of a
chain interbinding the symbols of the four elements. The inscription on
the Emerald Table is termed the Words of the Secret of Hermes, and they
are given at full length, with certain variations from the original text,
one of which places a chemical interpretation thereon. The text is well
known to students and need not be recited in full. The heads are that
things below are like unto things above, and that which is above is like
unto that which is below, for the fulfilment of the wonders of one only
thing. As regards this, the Sun is its Father, the Moon its Mother, and
the wind has borne it in the belly thereof. The earth is its nurse. The
process is to separate earth from fire, the subtle from the gross, gently and
with great care. It ascends from earth to heaven and again it comes down
from heaven to earth, receiving the power of things above and below.
XX1

-- Page 22 --
Explanation

Those who fulfil the work attain the g
departs from them.

XI. Mons Pumosopnorum, from Ger
that the year 1604 is inscribed on the 1
the Mystical Sepulchre of Christian Re
after a period of 120 years by the ade
on the surface seems therefore to ind
tomb or walled up vault of the central
human figure is the symbolical found
this is one aspect presented to the mir
according to the letterpress, delineate
respect of the Highest Medicine.

again there is a physical side adumbrat
fallen soul by a Medicine which is Je:
“ sorry in appearance ” which insures |
in the spirit. It is “the greatest pa
Jehovah has set forth for us in Natu
and is said to be hidden in this picture

XII. Pocutum Pansopnim, from G
Universal Nature is produced from t
four elements, and out of these are ¢
animal kingdoms, in the centre of whi
of Wisdom is the understanding of th
virtue of which all ultimately return is
that the name AZOTH is composed of
Greek and Latin Alphabets. It has bee
as the bond of union, the Universal
bodies: it is otherwise Philosophical
AZOTH and Fire alone are needed ir
to Arnold water is AZOTH, which wat
language Eliphas Lévi calls it the effic
Work. Here is one aspect of the Un
Rosy Cross.

XIII. Universat Cosmotocy of THE
crucian MS. The Endless Eternity a
tepresented by the Trinity, Which
Nature in the mode of Prima Materia
Three Principles is encompassed belov
which are generated the seeds of all 1!
The concentric circles beneath are ut
which is not furnished by the letter
witness concerning herself, as one se
imposes silence on those who come to
certain variations in Gengmme Ficurs.
importance in this connection.

x}

of the Plates

lory of the whole world and darkness

ferme Ficuren. It will be observed
nargin, and this is the date on which
sy Cross is held to have been opened
pts of a third circle. The intention
cate that Mons Philosopborum is the
traditional history, in which case the
er of the Order. It is possible that
d of the symbolist ; but the design,
s the process of the Great Work in
[he understanding is spiritual, but
ed. A healing is administered.to the
us Christ ; but there is also a thing
bodily health ” to those who attain
‘tt of the Kingdom which the Lord
re”: it is called Pater Metallorum,

EHEIME Ficuren. ‘The cosmos of
he One Nature; it brings forth the
enerated the mineral, vegetable and
ich is AZOTH. The true Draught
is close interlinking of all things, in
ito unity. A marginal note explains
the primals and finals of the Hebrew,
2n. understood in alchemical literature
Medicine, beginning and end of all
Mercury. Basil Valentine says that
| the work of wisdom, and according
ris argentum vivum. In his figurative
ient and final principle of the Great
iversal Medicine in the light of the

Rosy Cross, from the Kelpius Rosi-
nd Unsearchable Primum Mobile are
sronounces the FIAT and produces
, otherwise Chaos. The triad of the
r by the circle of the elements, from
ings—mineral, vegetable and animal.
intelligible in the absence of a key,
press. Therein Prima Natura bears
nt for service by God to man, and
know her. This design is found with
1 and has considerable bibliographical

ci

-- Page 23 --
Explanation of the Plates
XIV. Tue Burzssep Vision, from Grnerime Frcuren. The Rosicrucian
state of absorption by prayer in love and the Divine Experience therein,
the Central Sun beheld with eyes of contemplation. The inscriptions on
the radiant image are (1) Jehova, (2) Spiritus Sanctus, (3) Jesus, (4) Maria,
(5) Sophia. The kind of prayer is set forth in the letterpress below the
symbol and liturgically speaking is poor and confused in expression. But
its import is that all things come forth from God and all must return to
Him. He is the aid of those who are dedicated to His service in the heart, Ey
and He dwells in the heart of these. We who are nothing in ourselves attain ‘ns
true being in Him. The aspiration is therefore: Live Thou in me, O Lord,
that I may abide in Thee and may be brought out of my own nothingness
into that reality which is Thou.
XV. A Rosrcrucran Crpner. An account of this problematical document
will be found on pp. 583, 584.
XVI. Tueosopuia Rosicructana, from the Kelpius Rosicrucian MS.
Reproduced subsequently, with slight variations, in Grneime Ficuren.
According to the description it is Theosophical, Philosophical, Kabalistic,
Magical, to which the later edition adds the word Chemical. The Eternal
Uncreated Nature is placed at the head of the Diagram as a Radiant Sun,
containing the archetypes of all things, Quintessence, First Matter, Three
Principles, Trinity of Divine Persons, Light, Life, Humanity. And as if
this ineffable state of being were connoted by the 4in Soph of Kabalism,
the Eternal and Invisible Trinity is represented coming forth therefrom,
as also the trinity of finite, visible things. Below are Hyle and Chaos, from
which Nature is produced. The Sun is represented on either side of the
Chaos centred within circles inscribed with the symbols of the Zodiac,
Philosophical Principles, four elements and planets. The stages of the
Great Work are symbolised in the lower part of the Diagram.

XXIli

-- Page 24 --
THE BROTHERHOOD OF
THE ROSY CROSS
CHAPTER I
MYTHICAL ROSICRUCIAN PRECURSORS
Tuer Order of the Rosy Cross offers, on its external side,
not only those general difficulties which are inherent to the
subject of secret association but some others of a peculiar
kind, chief among which are perhaps the successive trans-
formations which it has suffered from within the groups
and the actual circumstances of its origin, supposing that
this is referable to the first quarter of the seventeenth
century. It is much more difficult of approach than is,
for example, the outward history of Emblematic Free-
masonry. When the art and craft of building temples
and houses began to be spiritualised is admittedly in a
cloud of darkness, setting aside of course the casual sym-
bolism which runs through all literature. We shall prob-
ably never know when men first took tools in their hands
and began to moralise upon them, or when for such reason
they might have called themselves speculative Masons—
had a denomination of this kind come into their heads.
But late or early—and not so late, I think—a time arrived
when they issued out of their obscurity and held that
epoch-making meeting which is connected for ever with
the name of the London Apple-Tree Tavern. 'Thereon
followed the institution of a Grand Lodge which became
that of England—regarded now as the Mother Temple of

B I

-- Page 25 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
the whole Masonic world. About the history hence-
forward there is no element of doubt on the broad scale,
and so also we know the long story of spiritual and emblem-
atic evolution which is that of the High Grades.

There is nothing corresponding to the year 1717 in the
history of the Rosy Cross. Between 1614 and 1616 certain
pamphlets appeared in German and Latin which affirmed
that a secret and mysterious Order had subsisted in Germany
for about two centuries; that it was full of light and
knowledge, derived from a hidden centre in the Near-
Eastern world; that it could and was prepared to trans-
form and reform all the arts and sciences; and, in fine,
that with this object in view, and for the personal benefit
of earnest, prepared seekers, it was willing to admit members.
The effect of this proclamation in Germany, Holland and
even England is now a matter of notoriety: everybody
who knows anything about Secret Societies in Europe
has heard of the great debate that followed. But the first
question for our consideration and the first difficulty
before us is whether there was a Society at all in any
incorporated sense when the documents which claimed to
reveal it were first published as an appeal to alumni and
literati of magian and occult arts. So far therefore from
a visible and recorded convention held at an Apple-Tree
Tavern, we are in the presence of a claim put out suddenly
from the void: all that which lay behind it is the initial
matter for our research, whether or not it may be possible
to reach thereon any degree of certitude.

So also in respect of developments, that which in Masonry
1s moderately clear at least lies far behind the veil in respect
of the Rosy Cross. The manifestoes of the early seventeenth
century were either sent out by an incorporated society
or led to imitative incorporation at an early stage of the
ed i and - either case there is sound reason for thinking

y was the original concern-in-chief, however

2

-- Page 26 --
Mythical Rosicrucian Precursors

the theory of transmutation may have been understood
and pursued within the particular circle. We know further
that it was left for a period, at least in one of the branches,
and there followed, as the fashion of a time, those astral
workings which are heard of in the eighteenth century.
We know, in fine, that there was a return to alchemy, and
there are vague hints upon processes followed at that
period. But what was included under the denomination
of astral it is our task to learn if we can, and so also whether
the Philosopher’s Stone in the light of the Rosy Cross was
a Mystery of Spiritual Healing and Divine Tincture, an
ethical art of contentment or a method of raising so-called
base metals into the perfect form of gold.

It is certain, again, that the great medley of theosophical
Israel under the name of Kabalism was one concern of the
Order, but there is no evidence on the surface to tell us
why it was pursued; now in the way of those Zoharic
doctors who became—according to their legend—a sect
of Christian illuminati ; now in the expectation of per-
forming prodigies by virtue of inherent power attributed
to Divine Names; and now in the contra-theosophical
sense of the dregs and lees of grimoires. We know in fine
that at the beginning there was an Occult Order, that
in some of the developments it remains at this day within
those measures, but that at the apex or crown of its evolu-
tion it has emerged from all the vain observances, from all
the seerings and the skryings, and has gone up into the moun-
tain of the Lord—the fabled secret mountain of adeptship—
in search of Divine attainment. But of these transforma-
tions and developments there are no records, except in
so far as they may exist in the Secret Houses of the Brother-
hood; and to approach therefore the story of the Rosy
Cross on this side of its subject demands access to sources
of knowledge which are open to few persons—if indeed to
any outside the hidden circles. ‘The archives of Mary’s

3

-- Page 27 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
Chapel, of Mother Kilwinning and other “ time immem-
oral” Lodges of the Masonic Brotherhood are available
to Masonic students, but—on the hypothesis that they
were and are—the Temples of the Rosy Cross may have
indeed their names and local habitations, but they are as
inaccessible to ordinary research as if they were in the
“ nowhere and the naught.” ;

As I have intimated therefore, its external history is
one of peculiar difficulty, and it requires to be approached
from within as well as without in order to reflect any real
light thereon. Its elusive nature and the charm of its
mystery, not to speak of the tales of faérie which have been
gathered about it by makers of myths for the past three
hundred years, have drawn imaginations in literature,
imaginations also in quest, who have woven about it
another and iridescent veil. We have to find how far
the Rosicrucian of romance has been made in the image and
likeness of those Brethren of the Rosy Cross who pass—
somewhat on the edges—across the horizon of history,
and how far their quality of adeptship corresponds in
the memorials concerning it with the radiant stuff of some
of the modern dreams.

So far as obvious memorials are concerned, Rosicrucian
history begins in and about the year 1614 with the publica-
tion of those documents which I have mentioned briefly,
and by a highly speculative inference from these it has
been supposed that the traditional founder died in 148431

1 Tt is a date otherwise which recurs in Rosicrucian reveries, but only to
betray research. Thusit happens that Mr. G. F. Fort recorded in AMERICAN
Nores anp Queriss, Philadelphia, October 24, 1891, as follows : “ In tracing
out recently some lines of historical research . . . , I came upon a statement
of fact that may be of interest, namely, the establishment in Sleswic,
Denmark, anno 1484, of a Fraternity of Rosicrucians: Fraternttas Rosarti
Slesvici condita, anno 1484.” A Danish Guild of the Rosary suggests that
someone has blundered, but it is not Mr. Fort, as it happens : his reference
is to Specimen Historico-Poiiricum Inaucurat G H
Amsterdam 18 h . A DE ILDARUM ISTORIA,

> 1834, the author being Cornelius Joscinus Fortuyn, who says,
4

-- Page 28 --
Mythical Rosicrucian Precursors
but the later legends of the Order have combined with
independent makers of myths to stultify this speculation
in favour of various conflicting dates and other founders,
more or less remote in antiquity. As there will be sufficient
opportunity to deal with them in later places, J will men-
tion here one only of the more recent legends which may
be said to have grown up within the Order, far down in
the eighteenth century. It has obtained a casual vogue,
owing to dissemination through Masonic channels in France.
It postulates a founder of the Rosicrucians in a certain
Ormesius or Ormuz and affirms that he was converted to
Christianity at Alexandria by St. Mark, a.p. 46. He is
said to have purified the Egyptian Mysteries and married
them to the new faith. His disciples followed their master,
and with these as a centre he established the Society of
Ormuz, or of the Light. The sign of membership was
a red cross worn on the person. Essenes and Therapeute
entered the ranks of this sodality, in which Hermetic
Secrets were preserved and transmitted. The Baron de
Westerode has been credited with putting forward this
fiction, he being an adventurer among secret societies
derivative from Masonry about the period of the French
Revolution. An obscure figure in the annals, I conceive
him nevertheless to have been connected with one of those
PP- 53, 54: Religiose Societates, que saculo XII jam reperiuntur, in Dania
Srequenter insecutis seculis occurrunt. Sic anno. 1485 in urbe Heligenhaven
prostat gildaSancta Crucis, Flensburgi inventtur gilda Sancta Marie anno 1514,
Fraternitas Rosarti (Rosenkranz. Briider-schaft) Slesvici condita anno 1484,
etc. It is obvious that the reference is to a Catholic Association for pro-
moting the devotion of the Holy Rosary and that Fortuyn’s parenthetical
gloss Tepresents his own confusion. He quotes otherwise an authority to
support him, and this is Rrea Crmsricm seu Ureis Rrpensis 1n C1ImBRIA
sit Descriptio, Ex ANTIQUIS Monumentis, ete. . . . Illustrata per Petrum
Terpager. Flensburgurgi, 1736, p. 438. However, the place in question con-
tains De Gilda 8. Foannis and opens De Gilda S. Nicolai, which concludes
on p. 440. They offer no light on the subject. On p. 434 there is a short
notice De Gilda S. Crucis, but I have searched the text in vain for any Guild
of the Rosary and any reference to the Rosy Cross.” ‘
5

-- Page 29 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
cliques which found shelter under the banner of Masonry,
offering little distinction between Rosicrucian Rites proper
and the numerous obediences of the Rose-Croix Grade
in the old Rite of Perfection. These things merged into
one another continually—or at least in the records
concerning them. The alleged Society of Ormuz has
been reflected into modern systems, like the confused and
unwieldy Masonic Rite of Memphis. It is a characteristic
specimen of spurious traditional history, to be met with
everywhere in Masonry.’

1 It would be interesting to follow this curious fable further and identify
the Rite with which it may have been incorporated at first. Among English
references there is Kenneth Mackenzie’s Royat Cycropmp1a oF Free-
Masonry, s.v, Ormesius. But he names no source. As a fact, however, he
derived information from Thory’s Acta Laromorum. Quite naturally, the
story has lost nothing in its travels from mouth to mouth. Sce in particular
Tue Turosopuicat Review, Vol. XXVII, pp. 422 et seg., 1goo-o1. It
produces some “ Reasons” for believing that Francis Bacon was a Rosi-
crucian and leads up to this main subject in the manner following: (1) The
Order of the Rosy Cross claimed Ormuz as it: founder: it did nothing of
the sort; the Ormuz fable was fathered on the Order at a late period.
(2) It was allied closely to the Knights Templar and [or] the Knights Com-
panions of St. John of Jerusalem. (3) Battista Porta in 1605 was a Chief of
the Rosy Cross, who “under cover of his comedies instructed initiates in
things human and divine ”—not apparently under cover of his famous work
on Macta Naroratis. (4) Wickliffe, Lollard, Chaucer, Dante, Petrarch,
Boccaccio, Voltaire, Goethe, Lessing, Swedenborg, Mesmer and Béhme

are to-day openly acknowledged as Brethren of the Craft,” by whom
does not appear, but by those presumably who regard Bacon as a Rosi-
crucian and as the “concealed poet” of the Shakespeare plays. It is
scarcely necessary to say that no particle of evidence is produced in support
of these statements : they are the vapourings of foolish dreams. Porta, for
example, died in 1615, one year after the Rosy Cross made its public
appearance on the stage in Germany. We may compare an essay on
we Rosicrucians which appeared in T'urosopuican Sirtincs, Vol. III.
in oneentt a said. to agree “ in pointing to an origin outside Europe,
fection s al lands.” They do nothing of the sort, and in fact the Ormuz
whe Ppears re stand alone. It stands or falls on the authority of Thory,
" the Puree at a letter by the Baron de Westerode is in the archives
1784; (3) th tit ane Rive; (2) that it was written from Ratisbon in
tint oh “a at it was addressed to the Head Tribunal ; (4) that it con-

§ the Ormuz story; and (5) that the story i ion i i
«received in Swed ys an story in question is described as
eden,” which may mean that it is a traditional history be-
6

-- Page 30 --
Mythical Rosicrucian Precursors

I have taken this particular illustration, not indeed that
it is the best, or otherwise the nearest at hand, but as serving
the purpose of a moment, to introduce the alternative
fables which are not traditional histories, manufactured
for Grade purposes—or to promote a particular claim—
but views and opinions formulated in all seriousness as
contributions to the Rosicrucian subject. I will cite them
in that order to which they would belong in chronology,
were there any chronology in reveries of this kind. We can
pass over as simply fantastic some unsupported expressions
of personal conviction like that of the French writer Sédir,
who tells us (1) that the Middle Ages and Renaissance were
united by a general belief in the existence of a Rosicrucian
Order ; and (2) that the Fraternity was at least coeval with
the Christian era.1_ So also Cohausen speculates concerning
longing to the Swedish Rite of Masonry, an incorporation of many elements ;
(6) that, according to de Westerode, the Rosicrucians came to Europe in
1188—an important date connected with Templar history; (7) that three
of the adepti proceeded to Scotland and there established an Order of Masons
ofthe East. This legend is naturally set aside by Thory. There is very little
doubt that he had seen the letter of Baron de Westerode, the present where-
abouts of which are beyond speculation, as the archives of the Scorrisu
Purtosoruicat Rire were dispersed on February 23, 1860. A catalogue was
printed, but I have failed to obtain a copy. Baron de Westerode was on the
Council of the Rrre or THE PuitaLerues and was present at the Convention
of Paris summoned by that illustrious Masonic body. See Acta Larto-
morum, I, 336, 337; II, 97.

1 Hisrotre pes Rose-Croix, 1910. Préface, p. x; cap. I, p. 31. The
author qualifies subsequently by affirming that a neo-Rosicrucianism arose
at a later period, meaning that the manifestation of the early seventeenth
century was a revival of something much older. But for this there is no
evidence. We may compare Kenneth Mackenzie in Tue Rosicrucian,
August, 1874, being Transactions of the Socretas Rosicructana In ANGLIA.
He appears to suggest in a confused paragraph that the Rosicrucian “system”
was originally identical with the Chaldees or Culdees. So also in the same
occasional periodical for 1g00 another dreamer affirms on his personal
authority, quoting nothing in support, that the “ School” descended from
the philosophers of Egypt and the Jewish rabbis. Compare Yarker, who
describes the Fraternity as “ inheritor of the Gnosis and mysterious wisdom
of Egypt.” See Norss on rue Screntiric anp Reticrous Mysterizs oF
ANTIQUITY, p. 71.

7

-- Page 31 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
Artephius, a supposed Arabian alchemist, placed far in
the past of Hermeticism, and calls him the patron of
Rosicrucians. The supposition is without warrant in the
single Latin tract which is extant under this name.* -

A considerable interest has attached always to the position
of Raymund Lully—meaning the alchemist who adopted
that name—as an exponent of Rosicrucian doctrine on the
side of Hermetic physics, and all the makers of incautious
hypotheses have passed from one to another a confused
reference to one of his famous tracts. “Their thesis intends
to cite the Txstamentum Macistrr Raymunpr LvuLuu,
addressed to a Philip, King of France. In Pars I, cap. 87,
of this work the adept states that he obtained the congela-
tion of common mercury by means of its menstrual, and
that he performed the experiment near Naples in presentia
phystct regis. . . et certorum soctorum. As used by Cicero,
the substantive word physicus signifies a natural philosopher,
scrutator and student of Nature: it carries no suggestion
whatever of adeptship, as understood in alchemy. In the
adjective form it means natural, more especially in connec-
tion with philosophy. The expression certi socii—particular
or faithful associates, may or may not imply a confederacy
by way of incorporation, a companionship in terms of
alliance; but it would be used also for adherents in a
common bond of sympathy. The context of Lully’s
statement specifies that his companions or witnesses of
the experiment included a brother of St. John of Rhodes
and one Bernard de la Bret : he was not therefore referring
to the members of a secret order. He adds also that—

t Hermrrpus Repivivus, Tom. {J. Whether the tract of Artephius was
Bertha originally in Arabic I am—on the whole—disposed to doubt.
pert ot leaves the question open. In any case it is extant now only in the

atin form. The alchemist, who is otherwise unknown, claims to have
attained the age of a th d b ; Aan
is no need to say that his memorial does not a ne Great Elba. There
any secret association, S Not contain a single reference to
8

-- Page 32 --
Mythical Rosicrucian Precursors

regia majestate salva, with due respect to the King—those
who saw what he had done understood it only in rather
a homespun manner. So much for the Societas Physicorum
under the leadership of a Rex Physicorum, as the passage
is interpreted by those who take it for a covert allusion
to the Rosicrucian Order or some kindred antecedent
fraternity.t

It remains only to say that in his work entitled Expert-
menta,s.v. Aliud Experimentum . . . XXXIV, Lully recurs
to the congelation of Mercury, and says that his operation
was performed in the presence of King Partinopeus, who
appears to be purely mythical.

Benedictus Figulus, who wrote and edited alchemical
treatises in and about the year 1608, appears to have under-
stood the certi socit of Lully as referring to a society of
alchemists, which society was established in Italy at the
beginning of the fifteenth century, and he would be there-
fore the father of the notion ; but its later purveyors have
derived it indirectly through Solomon Semler.?

1 The TestaMentTUM of Raymund Lully is found in Tozatrum CHEMIcuM,
Tom. IV, and in the Brsuiotueca Cuemica Curiosa of Mangetus, Tom. I.
The first part of the Testamenris called THeorrca and the second Practica.
Sédir affirms that the Tueatrum Cuemicum was edited by Rosicrucians at
Strasbourg, an entirely gratuitous notion. See Hisrorre pes Ross-Crorx.
Yarker, in his Arcane Scuoozs, p. 49, describes Lully as the great pioneer
of Rosicrucians, but as much might be said of any other important alchemist
prior to the seventeenth century. Heckethorn, in his Secrer SocrETIEs oF
att Aczs, betrays his incompetence by referring to Lully the entire
‘THEATRUM Cuemicum, as if this were one of his treatises instead of a great
collection of alchemical writings extending to ten volumes. Sédir suggests
that the debated passage in the TesraMENT was interpolated, for the in-
scrutable reason that Villanova’s Rosarum is cited in cap. 38. But Arnoldus
was a contemporary of the original Lully, who is to be distinguished from
the later alchemist who adopted his name. See my Raymunp Luuty:
Illuminated Doctor, Alchemist and Christian Mystic, 1922.

2 UnparTEIIscHE SAMLUNGEN zUR HisTorIE DER RosENKREUZER. Von
D. Joh. Salomo Semler. 4 vols. Leipzig, bei Georg Emanuel Beer. 1786,
87, 88. We hear also on Thory’s authority of an Order of Magicians at
Florence which is said to have merged into the Rosicrucians during the
eighteenth century. He appears to reflect intimations, most probably

9

-- Page 33 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

The addresses which occur in writers like Lully to Sons
of Truth, Sons of the Doctrine and Sons of the Order
have been applied, in much the same spirit of fantasy, to
the Rosicrucian Brotherhood or their precursors. Arnoldus
de Villa Nova makes use of such expressions,? but precisely
the same formule recur incessantly in the Zonar, where
they do not signify an incorporated society. ‘The alchemical
Sons of the Doctrine were the earnest researchers to whom
the adepti appealed and for whom their tracts were written.
They were also, and especially, the personal pupils of the
Masters.

Much stress has been laid also on the fact that a certain
Count von Falkenstein, Prince Archbishop of Tréves in
the fourteenth century, was saluted once in the dedication
of an alchemical work as ‘‘ Most Illustrious and Serene
Prince and Father of Philosophers.” On the authority
of this description it has been concluded that the prelate
in question was at the head of an Occult Fraternity, which
was that in fact of the Rosy Cross, whereas it is obvious in
mythical, in Tue Rosicructan Unvertep of Magister Pianco. Expanding
all his precursors, Reghellini is said to state that Kabalists and Rosicrucians
had settled from remote times at Florence, Vicenza and elsewhere.—La
Magonnerie CONSIDEREE COMME LE RESULTAT pgs RELIGIONS JUIVE ET
Curérienne, Tom. I, p. 344. But I do not find the reference either at the
place cited or anywhere in Reghellini’s three volumes. He speaks of a
Platonic Academy established at the place in question a.p. 1540, and terms
it a Masonic Institution. III, p. 71. He quotes also a statement of Nicolai
on the Order at Venice and Padua in 1622 and mentions a Rite of Alchemical
R..C.", at Padua in the eighteenth century.

1 Th Hermetic literature the custom is as old as the Byzantine alchemists,
and is no more significant of persons addressing one another within the circle
of a secret society than is the great debate of the Tursa PurLosopHORUM
which on the surface claims to be a Holy Assembly of Adepts, but bears
re pullest evidence of a compiled dialogue. As regards Arnoldus, who
ne ree quoted in this misleading connection, we have only to consult

S$ Liser Dicrus THEsauRus THEsavrorum ET Rosarrum PuILosoPHORUM
to see that the implicit of Filii Doctrine is precisely the same as
Oportet igitur inguisitorem hujus scientie—L1b. 1, ca ” 6—as Stud
ergo, charissime—Lib, Il, cap. 7—and Filin tens Phil van Lib,
IL, cap. 32. , Ss existens Philosophorum—Lib.

To

-- Page 34 --
Mythical Rosicrucian Precursors

sense and reason that his title is simply one of a patron of
alchemists. It is not unimportant to follow out this mis-
conception and mark how it has grown up. Among the
tracts of that fourth volume of THEATRUM CHEMicUM +
to which I have referred there is a Practica ALCHEMIE
ascribed to Ortholanus,? and it claims to have been com-
piled from his writings by an unknown Englishman named
Joannes Dumbeler ex mandato Illustrissimi et Serenissimt
Principis Patris Philosophorum Domini ac Domini Comttis
de Falckenstein, Divina Providentia sancta Trevensis Archie-
piscopi, anno Domini, 1386. Dumbeler, as I have said, is an
entirely supposititious Englishman, unknown to the history
of alchemy in this country, and the Lord Archbishop of
Tréves, who is not himself imaginary, is only a Father of
Philosophers in the sense of an interested patron—as
already stated. So far from proving the fact of an incor-
porated society of alchemists at the alleged period it
exhibits the denseness of those who have sought to found
an argument of this’kind upon such an inscription.

1 TuraTrum CHEMIcUM PREcIPUOs SELEcroruM AucTorum T’RacTaTus
pE Cuemia eT DE Lapipis Puysict Compositione, etc., 1613, Tom. IV,
Tract. 135: M. Ortholani Practica ALCHEMI®, PROBATA Parisils, anno
1358. There is, of course, no evidence that this is a genuine date, but
nothing attaches to the question.

? Ortholanus wrote two commentaries on the EMrratp Taste of pseudo-
Hermes and he is sometimes described as Le Puttosorne prs Jarpins Mari-
timts. He has been identified otherwise as alchimiste Parisien. He is better
known in England as Hortulanus. The Practica ALCHEMIz was translated
into English and published under date of 1627, based obviously on the
edition of T'zaTrum Curmicum. Professor Ferguson is disposed to question
whether Ortholanus and Hortulanus are names which represent one and the
same person, but it is suggested by the French sobriquet. Hortulanus has
been identified also with Johannes Garlandius, described as Anglus. Bis10-
THECA Cuemica, s.v. Hortulanus and Ortholanus.

3 See Cuno von FaLKensrein ats Erzpischor von Trizr, etc. By Dr.
Franz Ferdinand, 1886, in T. Lindner’s Minstertscue Brrrricr zur
GrscuicuTsrorscuuna, etc. Old Series, Heft 9.

‘ The tract itself has nothing especially distinctive, but is clearly—indeed,
lucidly—worded after its own manner, within its own measures of symbolism.
It is said that the Work of the Elixir appertains to Quicksilver, F lying Citrine

II

-- Page 35 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy C'ross

Towards the end of the nineteenth century there came
forward, however, a German claimant to distinction,
named Karl Kieswetter, author of a brief monograph on
the Hisrory or THE Orper oF THE Rosy Cross.1 He
affirmed (1) that he was a direct descendant of the last
Chief or Imperator of the Brotherhood; (2) that he was
in a sense its literary heir and was in possession as such of
many priceless Rosicrucian manuscripts;* and (3) that
among these was one in particular entitled Comprnpium
rotrus PuitosopHi# ET ALCHYMI FRraTERNITATIs Ros&
[sic] Crucis, ex mandato Serenissimi Comitis de Falkenstein,
Imperatoris Nostri, anno Domini 1374. The MS. was said
to contain alchemical theories and practical processes. If it
can be taken tentatively as in existence at the time of its
description, there is no question that it is fraudulent, as
the use of the word Imperator at the alleged period suffi-
ciently shews. According to Kieswetter this is the first
time that such a title occurs, but as a fact it is peculiar
to the eighteenth century and later. We have the evidence
of Michael Maier that the Order was ruled by a President
in the early seventeenth century. It is to be added that the
Sulphur vive, Green Sulphur—which is Vitriol—and Fixed White Sulphur.
Red Earth or Cinobrium, Silver and Gold also enter into its composition.
Ree is ako Hoxrus Amoxis Joh. Dumbeleii, Angli, in the collection of
Decapes pom 16a ON IMPERSCRUTABILIS CHIMICO-PHILOSOPHICE

it appeared in the year 1886 at Leipzig, in a German psychical and
Popa ene called Der SPHINX. It was translated into French by

LC. 398 and appeared in L’Iniriation. It is quoted in an un-
x aE we Lae tees book called Tue Rosrcructans, by H. C, and
. no’ Imperator in question is said to have been his great-grand father,
1764 %0T8o2 he was engaged in traasedbing Deen ime Brom
pee eeeonal ne ped these are the MSS. which passed into Kieewerter’s
inscribed with the dae on which it we nity and eee ce ee
Imperator by whose directions it was prepared. "Those of che iliest oe fod
belonged to the year 1400. e earliest perio

12

-- Page 36 --
Mythical Rosicrucian Precursors
claims of the German Rosicrucian inheritor are not of a kind
to establish confidence apart from documentary evidence,
and the documents—-which have been sought eagerly—are
not forthcoming.

The next mythical chief of the Rosy Cross is Aureolus
Theophrastus Paracelsus, the occult master of Hohenheim.
He has secured unwittingly a not inconsiderable vogue,
though the Fama Fraternitatis R .*.C .*. happens to say
in its sincerity that “‘ he was none of our Fraternity.” In
the older days, as now, it was the habit of many to institute
ascriptions within the circle of occult history without
reference to its written memorials. It is difficult to say
how and when the legend under notice arose. Miss A. M.
Stoddart suggests that one of its earliest traces is in the
woodcuts which accompany certain ProGNosTICATIONS of
Paracelsus in the collected edition of his writings by Huser,
published at Cologne in 1589 and 1590.1 One of these
woodcuts is said to shew a heap of books, including a volume
inscribed with the word Rosa. It is an exceedingly shadowy
vestige and may be ignored as such. According to another
story, Paracelsus was not indeed the founder of the Rosy
Cross—which had existed in earlier days than those of
Luther’s contemporary—but he reorganised and established
it on a new basis. Kieswetter puts forward this thesis
and draws it from some apocryphal manuscript. His
; 1 THE Lirt or Paracetsus, IQII, pp. 249, 250, and. ante, p. 236. The
illustration as described does not correspond with that which appears in the
English Propuectes or Paracetsus, translated by J. K., 1915, though it
claims to follow Huser. There are books and MS. fragments in Fig. xvi,
but the word Rosa is wanting. Fig. xxvi, however, exhibits a great letter
F standing on a Rose, beneath which is a crown. Two editions of the
Procnosticatio appeared circa 1536 and 1600 respectively, according to
bibliographical opinion, but the first is highly speculative, being that of the
dedication ad illustrissimum ac potentissimum Principem FERDINANDUM
Romanorum Recem, etc. Both contain the Rose-Crown illustration, with
the emerging letter F. I should not be at the pains to cite them were it
not for Miss Stoddart’s rather idle speculation.

13

-- Page 37 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
precious invention has gone somewhat far in its travels
among occultists and Masons.1. It may be compared with
the statement of John Yarker that, according to Lz ComTE
pe Gasatis, Paracelsus was elected Monarch of the Rosi-
crucian Society. What the famous occult romance actually
says, however, is that the Sage of Hohenheim attained the
Monarchy of Wisdom.?

Contemporary with Paracelsus was Cornelius Agrippa, who
is alleged to have founded an alchemical or theosophical
society at the beginning of the sixteenth century in Paris
and to have brought it about the same period to London.

8 . Pp .
It has been identified with the Rosy Cross and alternatively
with an early form of Emblematic Freemasonry. On this
subject Kieswetter and his manuscripts seem to have
exceeded the reasonable limits of caution by affirming
that the alchemist Eireneus Philalethes, “ when writing in
1650, expressely calls Agrippa Imperator.” As nothing
under the name of Eirenzus had appeared at the date in

1 See Transactions of the Newcastle Coruecrum Socieratis Rosicru-
cian@ in Ancria, Vol. I, p. 48; also Ars Quaruor Coronatorum, Vol.
XV, p. 32. The speculation unfortunately misled Archdeacon Craven in
his excellent work on Docror Roserr Fiupp, 1902. See p. 34. Comp.
Ars Quatuor CoronaTorum, V, 67.

* Yarker’s misstatement occurs in THe ARCANE Scuoots, p. 208. The
remark of Le Comre pz Gagatis appears in the Second Entretien. See
EnTreviens sur ues Sciences Sicrires, by the Abbé de Villars, Paris, 1670.
There are many editions. Yarker’s ignorant blunder has been reflected into
the Manchester TRANSACTIONS For Masonic Reszarcu. The article is
entitled “ Rosicrucianism and its connection with Freemasonry,” by F. W.
prockbank, who says that Gioseppe Francesco Borri was a most illustrious
osicrucian and left a record to which we are indebted for all our know-
ee of the subject. That which he left was La Cutave pet CaBINETTO
ée Cavaliere Gioseppe Francesco Borri, Colonia, 1681. It is supposed to
pave inspired the author of Lz ComTe pz Gazatis, but the French work
happens to have preceded the Italian. According to Charles Mackay, Exrra-
Bort ere Devusions, s.v., The Alchymists, the literary cabinet of
means how comp ete exposition of the Rosicrucian philosophy,” which
did na wever, that it gives account of elementary spirits, a notion which
elsewh originate with the Order but with Paracelsus, who—as I have stated

ewnere—was indebted to German folklore.

14

-- Page 38 --
Mythical Rosicrucian Precursors
question, the Rosicrucian legatee and his pretended authority
are confusing Eirenzus with Eugenius Philalethes, other-
wise Thomas Vaughan; but the statement is a simple men-
dacity in respect of both, as their works remain to testify.’

We are approaching the seventeenth century when we
arrive at the name of Dr. John Dee, that mathematician
and astrologer of Mortlake who was a prime favourite
with Elizabeth, Queen of England. He was precisely the
kind of person who might have entered or possibly even
founded a Secret Society like that of the Rosy Cross, and
seeing that, having been born in 1527, he died only at the
end of 1608, or some six years before the Fama FRaTERNIT-
ATIS was issued to the Iterati of Europe, it might seem
feasible that he was actually connected with our debated
subject during its embryonic period. He has been annexed
accordingly, but it proves as usual to be by those who
exhibit their inability to read the warrants which they cite.
In the year 1618 there was published at Hamburg an

1 Kieswetter’s invention is, of course, reproduced by Yarker in Tue
Arcane ScHoots as a matter of such complete certitude that it has not
seemed even worth while to name his authority. The sole foundation of
the story is that when Agrippa was sent as a young man to Paris by the
Emperor Maximilian he is afirmed by Morley to have made himself “ the
centre of a knot of students,” described otherwise as “a secret association
of theosophists,” who were admirers of Reuchlin, his doctrine of the Mirific
Word and so forth. For the journey to Paris see Agrippa’s Eristoia,
Book I, Letter 2, in the Oprrum Pars Postertor, published at Leyden per
Beringos Fratres, n.d. There is no authority for theosophical activities in
London, where Agrippa was the guest of Dean Colet. There is, of course,
nothing per se improbable respecting such an institution in either city.
THE QuartERiy Review of 1798 has been quoted for Cornelius Agrippa, his
secret associations and Freemasonry, but it did not come into existence till
1809. See also Henry Morley’s excellent biography of the occult philoso-
pher, 1856, I, 25, 58, 59, 62, 63. I may add that Trithemius was the in-
structor of Paracelsus as well as of Agrippa, and in the Rosicructan AND
Masonic Recorp for 1891 a certain Dr. Lemon had the assurance to speak
of Trithemius as a Brother of the Rosy Cross. In the case of a Masonic
Rosicrucian it is usually safe to dismiss the charge of mendacity on the
ground of invincible folly. In Anrma Macica Ansconprra, 1650, Vaughan
calls Agrippa “ the oracle of magic” and the “ master ” of Wierus.

15

-- Page 39 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
Epistiz of Roger Bacon on the Secrets OF Art anp Nature
AND THE Vanrry oF Mactc, which is said to have been
“ corrected after numerous copies” and edited by John Dee.
In this case it will be seen that it appeared posthumously
and at the height of a controversy which followed in
Germany upon the issue of the First Rosicrucian pamphlets.
The only sense in which it connects with our inquiry
is that Dee is supposed to have dedicated his edition to
the Rosicrucian Brotherhood, for which statement it
would seem that Kloss, the German Masonic bibliographer,
is the first authority.1 On examination, however, it turns
out that the Dee manuscript fell into the hands of an
unknown person who undertook its publication for the
benefit of seekers after knowledge, and it is to him only that
the dedication in question is referable, together with
an Epistle to the Reader which follows thereon.? I have no
special concern in challenging the editorial attribution of
the manuscript; apart from the preliminary matter it
signifies merely that the Mortlake philosopher prepared a
careful copy of Bacon’s tract and it remains an open ques-
tion whether he designed to publish it. In his catalogue
of fifty private and imprinted works,? enumerated in a
letter addressed by him to the Archbishop of Canterbury,
1594-5, there is no mention of his having edited the
Vanity or Macic, though he had a high opinion of Bacon
as one “whose earthly fame can never die,” 4 though he
__ 7 I mean that he mentions the fact of the dedication in such terms that
it might be supposed to have been written by Dee.

e full title of the edition is as follows: Episroza Fratris Rocerit
Baconis, De Secretis Operipus ARTIS ET Natura, er pe Nuiurrate Maciz.
Opera Fobannis Dee, Londiniensis, e pluribus exemplaribus castigata olim et
ad Sensum imtegrum restituta, Nune vero a quodam veritatis Amatore, in
bratiam ver@ scientee (sic) candidatarum foras emissa, cum Notis quibusdam
Pare bas Jouannts Des, parti edentis. Hamburg, anno cle Io, cxviii.

6g e samits, however, expressly that his list is incomplete.
Exemenrs We to Henry Billingsley’s English translation of Euclid’s
16

-- Page 40 --
Mythical Rosicrucian Precursors
sought after his works and transcribed more than one of
them with his own hand. As regards the printed dedica-
tion I need say only that its anonymous author specifies
in his opening lines that he was at Silesia in the year 1597,
at which period Dee was in Manchester, being Warden of
Christ’s College.?

So passes the Rosicrucian claim in respect of John Dee,
for I need not say that neither in the Farrurut Retation?—
so largely autobiographical in character—nor in his Private
Diary *—printed and in manuscript—is there the least
indication that he belonged to any secret societies. During
a six years’ sojourn abroad he met with personalities
dedicated to occult interests, including Heinrich Khunrath,
whose AMPHITHEATRE OF ETERNAL Wispom has long been
held to contain Rosicrucian emblems. Dee also projected
a treatise to be entitled De Horizonte ATERNITATIS in
reply to Andreas Libavius, who—in a book not named
specifically but published in 1593-4—‘‘ hath unduly con-
sidered a phrase in my Monas Hizrociypuica .. . by
his own unskilfulness in such matters.” The Libavius
in question was prominent in the Rosicrucian controversy
over twenty years after. Finally, one of Dee’s unprinted
works, referred to 1573, is entitled De Stetta ADMIRANDA
In Cassiopr® Asterismo, recalling the Rosicrucian con-
cern in new stars, e.g. in Serpentarius and Cygnus—which
are mentioned in Conressio Fraternitatis R -. C -.4

1 Charlotte Fell Smith: Lirz or Dr. Joun Dez, ¢. 21.

* A True anp Farrurut RELATION OF WHAT PASSED FOR MANY YEARS
BETWEEN Dr. Joun Der anp some Spirits. With a Preface by Meric
Casaubon. London: 1659.

* Tue Private Diary, edited by J. O. Halliwell, F.R.S., and published
by the Camden Society, 1842. It begins on August 25th, 1554, and ends
on January 19th, 1601.

* The fifty works enumerated by Dee himself may be contrasted with a
catalogue extending to 79 items, given in Cooper’s AruENa CANTABRI-
ciEenses, 1861, II, 505-9. No. 66 is called Treatise oF THE Rostcrucran
Srcrets, and the reference given is to Harl. 6485. This is one of the fraudu-

c 17

-- Page 41 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

I come now to the latest, most insistent and extravagant
dream of all, being that which connects Francis Bacon, Lord
Verulam, with the Rosicrucian Society as its founder and
original head. The name of the Viscount St. Albans has
been in the ear of most literate persons for far over twenty-
five years—both here and in America—as the concealed
author of the Shakespeare plays and poems. Ciphers and
bi-literal ciphers have been discovered in the plays and
offer proof irrefragable—in the opinion of those who have
found them—that the great sanctuary of English literature,
the true Helicon or Parnassus, is at St. Albans and not at
Stratford-on-Avon. ‘The question is none of our concern,
except in one consequence of its growth. ‘The great debate
on the ciphers was preceded by a debate which was supposed
to be founded on literary criticism, and for all reasonable
persons the value of this criticism has been exhibited by
its outcome: in other words, the canon of textual con-
sideration which proves Bacon to have written the works
passing under the name of Shakespeare makes it not less
certain that he was also responsible for the bulk of Eliza-
bethan literature—I speak of that which matters—and
of much also which followed, down to the period of
Rosinson Crusoz. Such being the putative Baconian
output, under the veils of many names, it will be obvious
that it was capable of yet further extension ; and when in
the year 1888 there appeared my first study on the subject
lent treatises known as the Rupp Couzecrron and belongs to the eighteenth
century. I shall recur to it in a later chapter. As regards Libavius, he pro-
duced Neoparaczzsica, written against the followers of Galen, in 1594, and
Tractatus Dvo Puystcr in the same year. On alchemy and Hermetic
Medicine he was the most voluminous writer of his period—almost of any
period—and his Opera Omnia Mepico-Cuemica appeared in folio at
Frankfurt, making three volumes, 1613-15. He died in 1616. I do not find
any reference to Dee’s Monas in the texts which I have been able to consult.
na Monas itself is exceedingly curious, but contains nothing to our purpose.

ts thesis concerning the symbol of Philosophical Mercury is reflected in
Gabel 8s SECRETIORIS PHILOSOPHLE Cowstperatio, to which the Rosicrucian

ONFESSIO was attached in 1615.

18

-- Page 42 --
Mythical Rosicrucian Precursors

of the Rosy Cross it was seized upon with all eagerness by
Baconian dreamers, who shewed to their own satisfaction
that the Hermetic Order, clothed in mysterious veils,
of anonymous and unknown invention, responded under
so many heads to the mighty schemes of Verulam that it
could have been conceived by no lesser mind. Thereafter
started yet another debate, which has continued with
unthinkable developments even to this day. It happened
in the fullness of time that—one in connection with the
other—Bacon and the Rosicrucians were taken over by the
Theosophical Society, which has the freedom of Akasic
Records—an illimitable field for skrying—and has published
the last word on the whole mystery. By the opening of
certain “‘ rifts in the veil of time ” to the eye of vision there
has unfolded a long scheme of successive incarnations,
marking so many great epochs in occult history. I will
omit the steps in personality which led up to Christian
Rosy Cross, who attained a certain grade of adeptship—
as it is afirmed—in the fourteenth century. He became
Hunyadi Janos in a later embodiment, Francis Bacon,
Thomas Vaughan, a certain Rakocsky—of princely Hun-
garian birth—and thereafter the Comte de St. Germain,
who is alive in the flesh to this day. It is “‘ a story told for
the truest,” if not for “ the holiest that is in this world,”
and it follows that the mens sana et alta of Bacon did not
less found the Rosicrucian Order, if he did so under a more

1 Dr. W. Wynn Westcott, Supreme Magus of the Masonic Rosicrucian
Society, is content with affirming, in his Data or THE History oF THE
Rostcrucrans, that Francis Bacon “ became a Rosicrucian Adept.” He has
neither evidence nor authority, good or bad, to offer for this statement.
I note also—not that it matters—his seeming conversion to the chief
Baconian contention, for he adds: “ And so Rosicrucianism may have been
the means of prompting the introduction of many mystic notions into the
Plays and Sonnets of Shakespeare.” Dr. Westcott’s opinion on any literary
question is fortunately not of my concern.

* It happens, unfortunately, that Vaughan came to birth in 1622, when
Bacon was still alive.

19

-- Page 43 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
ancient personality and wearing another name in the annals
of the past.*

I am not concerned with pursuing these famous inven-
tions, which must be taken or left according to the quality
of our distinctions in respect of psychic evidence and some
of its cheap substitutes in common reverie. For my
present purpose the one question that emerges is the
historical position of the affirmations which link Francis
Bacon with the Rosicrucian Brotherhood, in whatever
capacity and whether brought forward by those who repre-
sent a psychic or presumably critical interest. Let it be
remembered that Bacon was born on January 22, 1561,
and died in 1626, so that he may be said to have witnessed
the Rosicrucian Golden Dawn in 1614 and the setting of
its second lustrum. In the year 1902, Mr. A. P. Sinnett,
Vice-President of the Theosophical Society for along period,
wrote an article on THe Reat Francis Bacon, at the close
of which he suggests that, “ the student of the great Bacon

t An early memorial of this revelation will be found in Man: WuHENCcE
AND Writer, by Annie Besant and C. W. Leadbeater, from which depend
many articles scattered throughout the periodical literature of modern
theosophy. It may be said to have culminated in Francis Bacon, Baron
Verulam, Viscount St. Alban, by E. F. Udny, M.A., which ran for many
months in the columns of Tue Mrssencer, an American magazine belonging
to the same school The position assumed by this deliramentum magnum is
that “St. Alban was an initiate of the Great White Lodge,” described as a
‘Brotherhood of Divine Men, the firstfruits of our race, who have already
trodden the Path and have become the ‘ Right Hand’ of God, the agents
behind the Veil of the Supreme for guiding and governing the world.”
There is also another book of Mrs. Besant’s, entitled THE Masters, which
summarises the actual findings as follows: “The last survivor of the Royal
House of Rakéczi, known as the Comte de St. Germain in the history of
oe 8th century, as Bacon in the 17th, as Robertus the Monk in the 16th,
“: sunyadi Janos in the 15th, as Christian Rosenkreuz in the 14th . . . was
c sep e through these laborious lives and now has achieved Masterhood, the
engarian Adept’ of Tue Occur Wortp ”—a book by A. P. Sinnett—
. and known to some of us in that Hungarian body.” Compare Le Lotus
the Pe fore, which claims that theosophy is in direct relation with

er of the original Rosi i i i “
known to the initiates of our society.” Order. His described as “ an adept
20

-- Page 44 --
Mythical Rosicrucian Precursors
mystery must turn to Mrs. Henry Pott’s painstaking work,
Francis Bacon AnD His SECRET Society, where we get
striking arguments to shew that the Rosicrucian movement
in the early part of the seventeenth century was Bacon’s
doing.” There is no doubt that this literary lady had a most
intimate knowledge of the works of Lord Verulam, as of
everything remotely or approximately connected with
these, but respecting the nature of evidence she had no
knowledge at all; her view that Bacon was the centre of
a secret league for the advancement of learning is an
expression of belief, and so is also her notion that the league
in question was that of the Rosy Cross. We know exactly
their root-matter and that the association which Bacon
actually planned was in no sense secret at all. It was
developed ultimately along similar open lines as the Royal
Society. Though somewhat loose in the wording, Bacon’s
scheme is described tolerably by Biihle in his notice of
Tue New Arttantis and its Emblematical House of
Solomon—as the idea of a Society of Scholars (1) to
promote discoveries in physics by observation and research ;
(2) to displace the scholastic Aristotelian philosophy ;
(3) to dispel the theosophic, Kabalistic and alchemical
illusions of Bacon’s contemporaries; (4) to impel them
towards a surer, more faithful study of Nature.t

An examination of Mrs. Po:t’s somewhat elaborate work?
presents her from the beginning as her own court of appeal,
as well as her own counsel. She has credited Francis
Bacon, directly or indirectly, with the bulk of important
Elizabethan literature, and as it is impossible that he
could have produced single-handed so vast an output—

+ J. G. Bithle: Urner pen Urspruna . . . ver RosenKkrEUZER UND
FREYMAURER, 1804, to which Nicolai replied in 1806 in a volume of equal
pretensions called Ernick BrmerxuncEen UBER DEN Ursprunc per RosEn-
KREUZER UND FRreyMaurer,

_” Francis Bacon anp His Sxcrer Society, 1891. The publication of
this volume took place in America only.

21

-- Page 45 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

not to speak of the post-Elizabethan works which are also
fathered upon him—she postulates “united efforts.” In
other words, Bacon was the centre of a “secret league
for the advancement of learning.” It will be seen that the
thesis depends in this manner on the accuracy of her credit
side of the account, with which no one is in agreement
except a few kindred enthusiasts to whom I shall advert
shortly. She tells us in the next place that she has searched
the history of Secret Societies throughout the Middle Ages
and has decided that the Rosicrucian T'raternity is “ the
one of all others which would have been best fitted to
promote Bacon’s lofty aims.” ‘There is no need to point
out here, as an obvious answer, that the existence of a
Rosicrucian Society in the Middle Ages happens to be one
of the chief questions at issue: no doubt her purpose
would be served equally well by saying that he founded
the Order-—which is one of her alternatives. It is enough
that her contention is based on a question of Baconian
authorship, about which neither she nor anyone like her
has been able to satisfy a single reasonable mind. When the
evidence has been based on supposed critical considerations
we are embarked on a sea of false analogies and gratuitous
speculations: when it is founded upon buried ciphers
they prove to be arbitrary inventions by means of which
any authorship could be got out of any document.

Let us admit, however, for a moment the ruling of the
court of appeal and even extend its findings. Let us say
that Bacon wrote all which matters in English literature
from the Canrersury Tazzs to Sarror Resartus.! Be
in Tae Nn useestion may well appear incredible, but it has been made
already quoted, by a writer who s ome ne he MA ae hele ef
learning, after his name. From my own point f ven he » spestion is of
enormous value ‘th : point o view U e€ suggestion 1s 0
the Baconian ss és a shen of the canon of criticism which governs
sophical auspices They akespearean research, more especially under theo-

Prove nothing whose thesis proves too much.
22

-- Page 46 --
Mythical Rosicrucian Precursors
it granted also that a single Secret Society to furnish
amanuenses, or even aids in research, seems strictly
moderate. But what considerations are offered by Mrs.
Pott to persuade us that he selected the Rosicrucians—
supposing that they preceded him in time—or established
them as a league of scriveners? I have searched the whole
volume recommended by Mr. A. P. Sinnett and have
found three pieces of alleged evidence. (1) It is said in
the Fama Fraternitatis: “ After this manner began the

Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross, at first by four person
only, and by them was made the Magical Language and
Writing, with a great Dictionary, which we still use daily
to the praise and glory of God, finding great wisdom there-
in.” Herein, as we are told, are the head and heart of
Bacon discovered certainly, because one of his most cherished
schemes was the compilation of dictionaries. Unfortu-
nately, however, for Mrs. Pott, the Rosicrucian lexicon was
obviously a glossary of words to accompany an invented
language and its cipher alphabet, whereas Bacon’s
hypothetical dictionaries stood for encyclopedic compila-
tions, for repositories of knowledge. That is the distinc-
tion between them, and thereon collapses the evidence.
(2) The second evidential point, according to Mrs. Pott,
is that Bacon’s College of the Six Days, described in Tue
New Arttayris, is the College of the Rosicrucians.? This,
as she says, “ we know,” the rejoinder to which is an equally
distinct negative. (3) For the third she produces a selection

1 Were it otherwise, as there should be no need to add, the compilation
of an encyclopedia, ex bypothesi in the fifteenth or any other century, would
not prove that Bacon was connected with the compilers because he also had
a kindred scheme in his mind.

3 THE New ATLANTIS is an unfinished allegorical romance of the Utopian
kind which was published after the author’s death by Dr. William Rawley,
being appended to Syiva Syivarum and followed by Tue History or Lire
anD Dearu. A sixth edition appeared in 1651. The College of the Six Days
was called Solomon’s House alternatively, and was a place set apart from the
Test, even in the Utopian community.

23

-- Page 47 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
from fifty-two alleged Rules or Laws adopted by the original
Rosicrucians ; but with due respect to the good intentions
of a deceased lady I have to submit that, as enumerated by
her, these Laws are fraudulent. The “ original”? Rosi-
crucians—according to their legend—had an agreement in
common together, embodied in six clauses only, as we shall
see in the proper place, and out of these she extracts three.
The fifty-two Laws are those published by Sigmund
Richter in 1710,1 but Mrs. Pott has subjected them to
a process of editing in the interests of personal predilections,
as, for example, to shew that Rosicrucians were forbidden
to issue Rosicrucian writings under the names of their
authors*—presumably because the vast supposititious works
of Bacon appeared under other designations than his own.
Such are the heads of evidence that Francis Bacon belonged
to the Rosicrucian Society, whether as member and chief
at his period or as its original founder: they are of the
same kind and the same value as those by which it has
been sought to shew he wrote the plays of Shakespeare,
Tue Farrre Queen, Toe Anatomy or Metancuory and
so onward through the centuries, almost to our own day.
Next to Mrs. Constance M. Pott the most zealous
follower of this Quixotic quest was Mr. W. F. C. Wigston,
who between 1888 and 1892 issued four large volumes,
in which the connection between Bacon and the Rosi-
crucians was put forward as strenuously as his authorship
of the Shakespeare plays, the speculations being carried also
+S. R., ie. Sincerus Renatus, ie, Sigmund Richter: Dre WanrHaFFTE
unD VoLLKoMMENE BEREITUNG DES PuiLosopuiscens Srerns, etc. etc., i.e.
Tue Perrect anp TRUE PREPARATION OF THE PHILOSOPHICAL Stone, ACCORD-
oe Vie METHOD oF THE BroTHERHOOD oF THE GOLDEN AND Rosy
Breslzw, who ¢ Rules of the said Order for the Initiation of New Members.
and that such extracts were notte signed mr ee oF tne Congregation,
of any Brother ”—a reference most sbabl “oe we names OF acters
probably to their Sacramental Names.
24

-- Page 48 --
Mythical Rosicrucian Precursors

a considerable distance forward owing to a better acquaint-
ance with Latin and German sources.! Were it possible
to accept them we should reach at least a terminus beyond
which it would be impossible to go, looking back into the
past after Rosicrucian origins, and a starting-point forward
as from a basis in real fact. The vital points of Mr. Wig-
ston’s scattered and not a little confused thesis may be
collected thus together: (1) That Bacon belonged to a
corporate Society of which he was founder or head, and
that it is described under veils in THe New ATLantIs.
(2) That this Society was actually the Brotherhood of the
Rosy Cross, the manifestoes of which carry the chief marks
and seals of his own mind and philosophy. (3) That
Rosicrucian literature—which began in 1614—declined
soon after his death in 1626. (4) That a notable Rosi-
crucian Emblem appears on the title-page of THe New
Attantis and on that of Dz Aucmentis, being a heart
placed in the centre of an openrose. (5) That all the curious
and recondite doctrines held by the Rosicrucians are re-
flected by Bacon—including a restoration of knowledge,
the music of the spheres, the doctrines of the spheres,
and so forth. (6) That Rosicrucianism originated in
England and not in Germany. (7) That the initials of
Francis Bacon appear in the Fama Frarernivatis,
accompanied by a personal description, through which he
is identified.

1 Bacon, SHAKESPEARE AND THE RosicrucrANs, 1888; Hermes STELLA:
Notes and Jottings upon the Bacon Cipher, 1890; Francis Bacon—Porr,
Proruet, PurtosopHer—versus PHANTOM CAPTAIN SHAKESPEARE, THE Rosi-
crucian Mask, 1891; THe Cotumsus or Lirerature, or Bacon’s New
Wonrtp oF Sciznces, 1892. The first of these volumes appeared in London
and the fourth at Chicago. Mr. Wigston was an amiable and interesting
man, whose zeal and devotion should have produced good fruit in legitimate
fields of research. After the publication of his fourth volume he disappeared
altogether from the arena of debate, and I have failed to trace him subse-
quently. Baconians of the present generation, outside theosophical circles,
seem to have dropped the Rosicrucian thesis.

25

-- Page 49 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

I have put these points concisely, yet with a certain
force of expression, that they may lose nothing in the
enumeration: I will now take them successively and ex-
hibit their evidential values. (1) There is nothing what-
soever in the life of Bacon to shew that he was connected
with secret associations of any kind, but on the contrary
there is everything to indicate that he desired to bring the
literati and learned of Europe together in an open manner,
for the better advancement of learning.?

Tue New ATLANTIS represents a commonwealth of
learning established on those lines and is an allegorical
picture of the scheme. It is a fable embodying a design.
To suggest that it represents anything existing in time and
space is equivalent to proposing that Campanella’s City
oF THE Sun or the Respustica Curistiana of Andree
belongs to annals of literal history.? (2) As there is no
warrant for supposing that Bacon founded or belonged
to any Secret Societies there can be none for his connection
with the Rosy Cross, yet there is a certain very modified
sense in which it is true to say that the Fama FraTERNITATIS
and its connections are in analogy with the mind of Bacon
over things which are common to both. The reformation
of arts and sciences, the appeal from scholasticism to Nature,

1 The fact is on the face of his writings and has been recognised fully
and frequently. It is indeed the whole motive and subject of Bacon’s
Apvancement or Learning, which he was ready to promote by all reason-
able means. Ifh ks i i i i z

‘ s. ® speaks in one place of passing certain things “ from hand
to and with selection and judgment,” by a private reservation for “ fit and
selected minds, there is nothing in his life or his writings to shew that he
pursued this method, which he regarded, moreover, as “an old trick of
impostors, who have “ made it as a false light for their counterfeit mer-
chandises,”

? Rerpustic® CHRIsTiaANOPOLITANE Desc i

! RipTIo, 1619. An English
One Dr. F. E. Held has been issued by the American Branch of
neglected Ut niversity Press, 1917. It is called Curistianorouis, truly “a
Of ome Sug Be as someone has said concerning it. Campanella’s Ciry

—_ IS. E
far-famed in compariton, » 1DEA KEIPUBLIC# PHILOSOPHICH, 1623—seems
26

-- Page 50 --
Mythical Rosicrucian Precursors

the dethronement of Aristotle, the longing for a better body
of medicine and a purer body of religion began neither
with Bacon nor the Rosicrucians, for their roots lie back
in the centuries. The Rosicrucians and Bacon are in
undesigned correspondence therefore one with another,
not because the secret Brotherhood came to birth in a study
at St. Albans or because German adepti inspired the Novum
Organum, but because both belonged to their epoch and
were products of their immediate past. (3) To affirm that
Rosicrucian literature declined soon after the death of
Bacon in 1626 is an arbitrary and ex parte statement for
the sustenance of a particular thesis, and the bibliographical
records are against it. So far as Germany is concerned
it had declined previously; and publications on either side
of the debate raised by the official pamphlets were few and
far between after the year 1620. I can trace nothing in
France prior to 1623, when Gabriel Naudé issued his
hostile criticism, while in England Robert Fludd was still
unfolding Rosicrucian theosophy and occult sciences in
1629. (4) The notable Rosicrucian Emblem proves on
comparison not to be Rosicrucian at all. The heart placed
in the centre of an open rose should have a cross inscribed
upon the heart, in which form it appears—but very late
indeed in the records—among Tur Secret SYMBOLS OF THE
Rostcructans oF THE SIXTEENTH AND SEVENTEENTH CEN-
Tourigs, Altona, 1785-8.1 Stripped as it is of this key-sign,
the device of Bacon or his printer has no connection with
our research. (5) The alleged analogies between Rosi-
crucian and Baconian doctrine have been discussed
sufficiently in my consideration of the second point ; and
it remains only to say that such topics as the music of the
spheres, the harmonies of the world and so forth are only
treated incidentally and casually by the philosopher of

x There is also one example of a heart centred in a cross, See p. 14 of
the reprint issued at Berlin in IgIg,

27

-- Page 51 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

St. Albans, whereas Robert Fludd—his contemporary—
had taken them into his heart and wrote at large concerning
them.: (6) As regards this point, it must be understood
that the origin of Rosicrucianism in England rather than
in Germany—though Christian Rosy Cross was a German
by the hypothesis of history ?—does not depend from any
particle of direct evidence, but is an implication of the
dream that Bacon was father or at least a sponsor of the
Order. On such an assumption it is obvious that Rosi-
crucianism was conceived in England, even if it was born
abroad; but there is no external fact or circumstance to
render such a notion tolerable. Mr. Wigston ® says that
when Michael Maier, the alchemist, visited England, and
perhaps stayed with Robert Fludd in his beautiful manor
at Bearsted, he did not bring the Order of the Rosy Cross
—so to speak—in his pocket: he carried it back rather on
his return to Germany. But a little later on our apologist
has perforce to admit that on his return Maier found the
hterati of his native land—all its theosophists, alchemists
and astrologers, all the easy believers in tales of wonder
and all the hard heads—waging one with another a royal
battle on the claims of the Rosicrucian manifestoes.
There is not the least reason for placing the origin of the
Order otherwise than in the Teutonic fatherland, where all
its antecedents lay: it bears the signs and seals of its
German sources and is redolent of that environment.
(7) To say, finally, that the initials of Francis Bacon appear
in the Fama Fraternitavis, together with a personal
Puen ang, jPeculations i music in Urriusqut Cosmr Mayors. tae
Srcunpus, 1618, s., De Ta ee Primus, 1617 ; tbid., TRActTarus :
1623, 5.v., M onochordum Ma unde Symphoniacum "md eneohcin nan ings

> The Fama describes him as “‘ the most. od] d high illaminated E
Father, our Brother Cu.R:C-.aGe godly and highly i nated |
youth he was “of 2 strong Dud, contin an adds elsewhere that in his :

* See Francis Bacon, etc., s.v., “ Notes on Rosicrucian Literature.”

28

-- Page 52 --
Mythical Rosicrucian Precursors
description, is—in all frankness—to bear false testimony.
The manifesto in question alludes to a mysterious Book T,
being a parchment, described as a great treasure. It ends
with a Latin Exocrum, after which the Brethren of
the first and second circles are said to have placed their
initials, by way of signature. Among those of the earlier
group—and belonging ex hypothest therefore to the fifteenth
century—is Fran. F.B.M..P.A-.., described as
Pictor et Architectus.1 There is neither sense nor sincerity
in affirming that these initials signify Francis Bacon, nor
could he be identified otherwise under such denominations
as Painter and Architect, though Mr. Wigston has dedicated
several pages to an argument that he was both, if the words
are understood within their figurative or emblematical
measures.

We see, therefore, that so far as evidential values are
concerned the deponent here cited is out of court or non-
suited on every count of his affidavit. Were it possible to
think for a moment that the Fraternity of the Rosy Cross
had its concealed founder and chief in this country, Robert
Fludd would be assuredly a far more plausible claimant
than Francis Bacon; he corresponds to all the essential
qualifications, generally as occult philosopher, especially as
Theosophist, Alchemist, Kabalist, Magian and Exponent of
medicina catholica, who taught from a seat of learning
placed within the veil of a mystical sanctuary of healing,
according to his own description. Bacon was none of
these things, and Mr. Wigston has fallen into many
signal errors of enthusiasm in attempting to shew that
he was.

There is also Mr. Harold Bayley, who appealed long ago,
for “further investigation and research” in respect of

1 The same original member seems to be mentioned earlier as Brother
B .., and the alleged personal description says that he was “ a skilful painter,”
which cannot be called a characteristic definition of Francis Bacon.

29

-- Page 53 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
Francis Bacon. He lays down (1) that “St. Alban, poet
and dramatist,” belonged to ‘the mystic Brotherhood
of the Rosicrucians,” apparently because it was one of
“their principles and rules to produce works under other
names than their own ”—being Mrs. Pott’s thesis, as we have
seen; (2) that the history of Bacon offers a parallel with
that of Christian Rosy Cross, because at the age of fifteen
he requested his parents to remove him from Cambridge,
“as he had acquired everything the university was able to
teach,” while—according to the Fama FRATERNITATIS—
the Rosicrucian protagonist went Eastward in search of
wisdom at about the same age; (3) that Mr. Bayley has
discovered “ peculiar and distinctive Rosicrucian symbols,
cunningly but unquestionably concealed in the ornamental
head and tail pieces” of Baconian books ; (4) that certain
watermarks on the paper used in printing THe ApvANcE-
MENT OF LEARNING shew the initials R. C., C. R. and
“ perhaps” C. R. C., while others include roses. The
frivolity of these intimations is manifest on their surface.
(1) The original Rosicrucian manifestoes were by their
hypothesis on the part of the Society at large and could
appear under no individual names, but the expository
literature of the subject is under well-known names, like
those of Robert Fludd, Michael Maier, Thomas Vaughan,
John Heydon, whence it is the very reverse of the truth
to propose that the mystical Brethren were accustomed
to produce works under names other than their own.
(2) Between the biography of Bacon and the traditional
personality of Fama Fraterniratis there is no analogy

* See Tracepy or Sir Francis Bacon, 1902, and also JouRNAL OF THE
Bacon Soctery for the same year. I do not know whether Mr. Bayley has
abandoned the views summarised above, but in his New Licut on THE
Renarssance and Lost Lancuace or Symzoutsm, published some years later,
the references to Bacon are few and far between and are confined to brief
quotations, quite apart from any thesis, though he is dealing with water-
marks and printers’ ornamental blocks,

30

-- Page 54 --
Mythical Rosicrucian Precursors
whatever. The one left Cambridge, weening himself
stuffed with its knowledge, but the other went to the East,
presumably in search of knowledge. It seems almost
beneath the native dignity of criticism that one is called
upon to point out a fact so obvious as this. (3) The alleged
Rosicrucian symbols in the head and tail-pieces of Bacon’s
works can be dismissed in a no less summary manner, for
the Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross has only one character-
istic and exclusive emblem,! being that whence their name
derives, and it appears nowhere in connection with the
writings of Verulam, whether as a printer’s ornament or
as a watermark on the paper. (4) As regards watermarks,
I make no pretence of distinguishing the specific edition of
Tue ADVANCEMENT to which Mr. Bayley refers, but it is
certainly not that of the first two books, which appeared
in 1605, is long antecedent to the original proclamations
of the Order in Germany and could therefore—under any
circumstances—prove nothing. I am of course far from
admitting that the initials C. R. and their variants used
as watermarks would prove anything at any period, and
I remember Mr. Bayley’s methods in two later books,
where any watermark chalice is affirmed to be the Holy
Graal, and any pictured castle is that of Corbenic or Mont
Salvatch. It is not in such manner that great debatable
questions attain a settlement.?

1 It has been naturally a matter of convenience to father on the Brother-
hood any emblems which happened to help the speculations of enthusiasts
who have seen the Rosy Cross wherever they turned their eyes and would
have liked to discover it everywhere. The pelican is one useful instance,
but we shall find much later on its real position in our subject. As the
Rosicrucians were alchemists, all the great cloud of pictoriai symbols found
in alchemical textbooks may have been part of their concern ; but they were
not characteristic of the Order. So also on rare occasions we meet with
figures and diagrams in Rosicrucian books which are suggestive of Masonic
signs and moralities ; but again they are accidental or subsidiary, not essential
to the Order and not belonging to its doctrine.

2SeeA New Licut on THe RenatssaNncE, 1909, pp. 68, 69, where it is said
that some writers represent the Castle of the Graal as situated on a moun-

31

-- Page 55 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

Here are the findings of an exceedingly restrained
criticism on the Baconian origin of the Rosy Cross, outside
akasic records. ‘The last state of the subject is far more
frantic than the first in respect of these, for there has come
about a kind of marriage between the two methods of
research. The results of astral skrying have been fortified
by gleanings from the Bacon-Shakespeare literature, while
the pages of Mrs. Pott and her lineal descendants in the
apostleship of literary unreason have been illuminated from
time to time by the faculty of intuition and its substitutes,
directed thereupon. There was never such a mad world,
my masters, as that which has been formulated around
the central figure of Viscount St. Albans. It seems idle
to plead that for want of evidence—except in the opposite
direction—we are unable to regard him as a Master of
the Rosy Cross, or originator of the Rosicrucian Fraternity,
or directly in touch with the Brotherhood and author of
the allegory concerning C.°.R.°.C.*.,! when these compara-
tively minor marvels are swallowed up in the shadow of
truly cyclopean revelations, according to which (1) Bacon
“created single-handed the literature and to a large extent
the language of the Elizabethan age”; (2) was the real
author of Pope’s Essay on Man, of Addison’s contribu-
tain. “ Figs. 155 to 158 are representations of this castle.” Again: “In
Figs. 165 to 213 we have a series of designs embodying the manifold phases
of the Graal cult.” There is no evidence whatever and no process of inter-
pretation could beg any question at issue more completely. See also Tue
Losr Lancuace or Symzouism, 2 vols., 1g1z. “The object surmounting
Fig. 127 is the Sangraal,” p- 51. Many other places could be cited, and the
method adopted throughout—whatever the subject in hand—seems to me
quite as arbitrary. It is characteristic of the kind of research. M. Eugéne
Aroux pursued it for years in France, and his Mysrires pt LA CHEVALERIE
is its illustration at large,

* See Tue Rostcrucians, by Brothers H.C. and K. M. B., which says :
oy that there is a strong probability that its author was Francis Bacon, Lord
(3) that 3 ©) that Tue New ATLAnNts is a sequel to Fama FRaTERNITATIS ;
Sterl Sea, sign, secrecy and oath were identical in both works, which is

erly contrary to fact; (4) that as in Bensalem of Tur New ATLANTIS

32

-- Page 56 --
Mythical Rosicrucitan Precursors

tions to THe Specraror, of Sartor Resarrus—perhaps
by way of inspiration—of Tue Ancient Mariner and
Fitzgerald’s Omar KuayyAm ; and finally (3) endured not
only the incarnations and reincarnations which have been
mentioned briefly but was the legitimate son of Queen
Elizabeth and heir to the throne of Britain in place of
James I. It seems incredible that a sane editor—if such
a person exists in American theosophical literature—should
publish month after month these vagaries of a literary
mania in a periodical which pretends to be serious. But
these on the one part are findings of the particular canon
of criticism adopted in Baconian circles, and on the other
are relations of ciphers and bi-literal ciphers, fortified by
expert readings in the astral records of the past.

That which emerges from the research embodied in the
present chapter is the signal importance attached to the
idea of the Rosy Cross, its fact and the claims advanced
concerning it, for several occult interests at this day and
during two or three generations immediately preceding.
There is no greater name in alchemy than is that of Ray-
mund Lully, whether identified with the doctor tlluminatus
of the Balearic Isles or regarded as an Unknown Master,
described vaguely as a Jewish neophyte, which might
there were “‘ books pertaining to the Christian Revelation before they were
written,” so in the tomb of Christian Rosy Cross were unwritten works of
Paracelsus, truly a striking evidence of lapsus memoria in both cases. The
rest of the evidence for the Baconian authorship of the Fama is of similar
value. No doubt the canon of criticism represents a high-water mark of
Baconian erudition acquired in the light of theosophy and its peculiar glass
of vision. As regards the work which I have cited and its authors, Brothers
H.C. and K. M. B. are to be understood as ladies, in accordance with the
unspeakable terminology of Female Freemasonry. The little volume forms
one of the Transactions of the Golden Rule Lodge, under the obedience
of Universal Co-Freemasonry. This body is to be distinguished from an
independent obedience which came forth therefrom, and because it is the
newest thing on earth is not unfitly denominated Ancient Freemasonry.
The book is innocent enough by intention, but fanciful in its dealings with
the facts of Rosicrucian history and of wild extravagance in speculation.

D 33

-- Page 57 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
suggest a “ proselyte of the gate,” but was used to identify
a convert from the religion of Israel. There is no occult
personality to compare with Paracelsus, while that other
ill-starred pupil of Trithemius, Cornelius Agrippa, is of
traditional repute in magic. Lastly, Francis Bacon is the
monitor and prophet of the new age which followed the
Renaissance and Reformation. It is these who are mar-
shalled successively to explain the Rosicrucian Mystery.
The pleas fail, as we have seen, but there is something
momentous in the ascriptions. It means that in study-
groups, as among romance writers, the Mystery loomed
largely, portending much more than was exhibited on
its surface, however curiously blazoned.

34

-- Page 58 --
CHAPTER II
MILITIA CRUCIFERA EVANGELICA

So far as the inquiry has proceeded, we have failed to find
traces of any Rosicrucian Fraternity prior to the seven-
teenth century. Certain conspicuous personalities—occult
and otherwise—have been cited as its founders or members,
but the ascriptions have proved on examination to be
based (1) on false inferences from the text of an early
document—as in the cases of Raymund Lully, the alchemist,
and a Prince-Archbishop of T'réves ; (2) on the authority
of archives which are not produced in evidence—as in the
case of Paracelsus; (3) on the identification of any report
or rumour concerning any Secret Society of past centuries
—more especially of an alchemical kind—with the Fra tres
Rose@ Crucis, as in the case of Agrippa; (4) on the careless
misreading of a printed text—as in that of John Dee;
or (5) on the literary arguments of persons whose canons
of criticism are beneath contempt, and on the ravings of
occult dreamers—as in the case of Bacon. The specula-
tions on Rosicrucian origins apart from specific or known
personalities are also numerous and have one common
characteristic, being the absence of evidence to support
them. I will pass over Michael Maier, who decides on
1413 as the date of the Order’s foundation,! because he
and his claims will call for consideration at length. Solomon
Semler also refers the Rosicrucians to the fifteenth century

1 See Turis Aurea: hoc est, de Legibus Fraternitatis R“.C2.. Franco-
furti, 1618.

35

-- Page 59 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
and says that the name Rosenkreutz—being that of the
traditional founder—was borrowed from a Knight of the
Golden Fleece.1 His speculative dates are as follows:
1410, a Rosicrucian Society arose about this time, or was
then existing in Italy ; 1430, there was another established
in Flanders ; 1459, another was extant in Germany.?

It must be admitted freely and fully that there was noth-
ing more calculated to produce casual and informal associa-
tion for aid and support in common than the arduous
pursuit of alchemy and its gropings in the dark night of
physics. ‘There are traces of such association, and I have
no doubt in my mind that Italy, Germany and France
were full of Secret Societies prior to the Reformation 3—
some for the advancement of science, of which alchemy
would be then a branch ; some for the liberation of religion,
of which the Brethren of the Common Life, the Friends
of God and the sects in Southern France are typical
examples ; some for the administration of occult justice,
like the Secret Tribunal. But the point is that in respect

1 Unpartenscne SamMiuncen zur Hisrorig per RosENKREUZER. 4
parts, 1786-8.

2 The facts—real or alleged—produced by Semler do not bear out his
opinions. The so-called Rosicrucian Society is obviously the more or less
mythical Academia di Segreti, of which we hear in connection with John
Baptista Porta, who is supposed to have founded it in the second half of
the sixteenth century.

* They were probably everywhere and for purposes of all kinds, England
being no exception. Among Ashmolean MSS. at Oxford, the vellum fly-
leaves of No. 360 contain (1) “ Letters of Frater Johannes Gardianus . . .
receiving Richard Ghonge (or Young) into a Fraternity. Dated in the
Epiphany, 1450... . (2) Lettersof Frater Wi. . ., receiving John Claxtone
and Matild his wife into a Fraternity.” See Catatocur of the MSS. be-
queathed to the University of Oxford by Elias Ashmole. Ed. by W. H. Black,
1845, p. 271. ‘The nature of these associations does not emerge, but the
use of the term Frater in both cases carries occult suggestions, religious or
prnerwise, As regards Gardianus, see my note ante, p- Il, respecting

ortulanus. If this pseudonym and also that of Ortholanus covers the
personality of Gardianus, writing in the mid-fifteenth century, it follows
that Dumbeler’s dedication to Falkenstein is antedated by nearly a century.

36

-- Page 60 --
Militia Crucifera Evangelica

of alchemy every rumour—at however far a distance—
of sporadic gatherings together has been at once labelled
Rosicrucian by uncritical people in the past; and the
qualifications of Semler are indicated by his last date.
The year 1459 is that which appears at the head of the
third Rosicrucian manifesto—being THe Cuemicat Nup-
TIALS—and it is at once interpreted as evidence that the
Order was extant in Germany at that period. But we
shall see that the romance in question belongs, by the
confession of its writer, to circa 1603.

Coming down to much later fantasiasts, there is John
Yarker—always confused and confusing—who affirms that
the early Rosicrucians were initiated by “the Moslem
sectaries ’ and adds that the fact is “in evidence,” but
no authority is given. It can be supplied, however, for
according to the Fama Frarerniratis the traditional
Christian Rosy Cross visited Damascus and Fez, as well
as a certain Hidden City, and was there instructed in the
secret knowledge which became afterwards that of the
Order. So does Rosicrucian myth become witness of
Rosicrucian claims, according to the best spirit of Yarker’s
methods—other evidence being none. There is also the
voice of Masonry, as it has been raised on the subject in
Switzerland, and according to this the Rosicrucians were
Gnostic herctics.? It is an exceedingly mixed instruction,

1 Tue Arcane Scuoots, by John Yarker, 1909, p. 430. The chief point
that is “in evidence” throughout this chaotic volume is the author’s
capacity for accepting anything that he has met with in print under practi-
cally any circumstances, so long as it serves his purpose. In his occasional
periodical Tue Kwepu, Vol. IV, No. 3, August, 1844, he alludes in similar
terms of certitude to a “ Rosicrucian MS, at Cologne, written by Non Omnis
Moriar.” But he is only quoting from Tue Rosicrucian Unverrep of
Magister Pianco, who cites nothing in support of his statement.

2 Magonneriz Prarique: Cours d’Enseignement Supérieur de la Frane-
Magonnerie, Rite Ecossais Ancien et Accepté. 2 vols, 1885. It is called
edition sacrée, Saddressant exclusivement aux Francs-Magons réguliers, and
vet it is publiée par un Profane. The editor is an enemy of Freemasonry

37

-- Page 61 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
which postulates Zoroaster as the fountain-source of
Gnostic doctrine, but he derived apparently from India.
It was after this manner—if I understand the deposition
rightly—that Christianity itself came into the world,
“a gnosticisation of the ancient symbolism.” The Tem-
plars arose in their day and acquired Gnosticism at the feet
of Persian Sufis. Being destroyed in due course, the
“pure Gnostic symbolism ” was inherited and preserved
by the Rosicrucian sect. This is obviously matter of
revelation—however and whencesoever inspired—so that
it transcends the evidence which it is not in a position to
furnish. We meet otherwise with the Order of the Temple,
which—according to an alternative reverie—did not beget
the Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross, this having been trans-
mitted by Ormuz, as we have seen already ; but the two
Orders subsisted in close alliance.

These inventions might be multiplied almost indefinitely,
but enough has been cited for my purpose, and I do
not claim to have taken the entire annals of folly as
my province. Not one of those which have been
selected carries the thinnest colourable tincture of the
plausible on its surface, while the seals of intellectual
dishonesty are the sign-manuals which are marked on
most.

As a possible counterpoise to the myths of cloud and
moonshine, I shall take in the present chapter one case
which stands out by itself and appears to offer something
in the guise of concrete fact, whether or not it may prove
to have been overlaid subsequently. Our initial knowledge
on the subject throughout English-speaking countries is
ad rates thet the work which he introduces is one of the worst of its kind.

© have been written par le rds puissant Souverain Grand Com-

mandeus Qe Suprémes Conseils con fédérés & Lausanne en 1875. There is, how-

At the partical ar assembly onc ot all Supreme Councils in the Scottish Rite.

President, ere would have been an elected
38

-- Page 62 --
Militia Crucifera Evangelica

an essay! by Thomas de Quincey, adapted rather than
translated from a German original,? the work of Professor
J. G. Buhle, a writer of consequence at the end of the
eighteenth and early in the nineteenth century. He is
one also who followed the golden counsel of citing the
authorities from whom he derived on his own part, and
in this manner I have got so far to the root of the subject
as seems possible at this day. Biihle derived his information
from WIRTEMBERGISCHES REPERTORIUM DER LITTERATUR,?
containing an historical monograph entitled New Etucipa-
TION OF THE History oF THE RosicRUCIANS AND ALCHEMISTS,
on which the following account is founded. It tells of a
certain enthusiast named Simon Studion, who was born at
Urach in the State of Wiirtemburg in 1543.4 He graduated

1 Hisrorico-Criticat Inquiry inro THE ORIGIN oF THE RosICRUCIANS
AND THE Freemasons. Lonpon Macazine, Vol. IX, January to June, 1824.
The successive papers were initialled X. Y. Z. It has been reprinted fre-
quently in the Collected Works of De Quincey and in selections therefrom.

2 J. G. Bithle: Urper pen Ursprunc unD pie VORNEHMSTEN SCHICKSALE
DES OrpEeNs DER RosENKREUZER UND FREIMAURER, 1804. It was delivered
originally in Latin as a discourse before a Philosophical Society of Géttingen
and is supposed to have been printed in this form, but all references which
I have met with have proved to be false lights. The following brief report
appeared in GOTTINGISCHE GELEHRTE ANZEIGEN UNTER DER ANSICHT DER
Kénicp. GEsELLScHAFT DER WIssENSCHAFTEN. 5 Sttick den 8 Fanuary, 1803 :
“Gottingen: Am 18 December vor. F. hielt der Hr. Professor Bihle eine
bistorische Vorlesung in der Konigh. Societat der Wissenschaften iiber die Ent-
stebung der Freymaurerey, als einen Gegenstand, der in die Geschichte der
Philosophie gebort, p. 41.

3 The Repertorrum appeared in three small volumes, 1782-3, and is
a collection of considerable interest. The monograph under notice begins
at p. 512 of Vol. II and is pseudonymous, but—as suggested by Von Murr—
they were all possibly the work of J. W. Petersen, who seems to have been
editor of the whole and is described as Herzogl. Wirtemb. Unter-Bibliotheker.
His name appears after Tract 8 in the third volume. The second volume
is almost entirely occupied by a life of J. V. Andrew. Behind the Reprr-
ToriuM there stands a much earlier reference, being that of Melchior
Fischlin : Memoria THeo1oc. Wirtemserc, 1708, Supplement, pp. 204-5,
s.v. Simon Studion. To this I shall refer shortly.

* It is said that there is much confusion as to the date and personality
of Studion. His name is of considerable importance “ for the history of

39

-- Page 63 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

at Tubingen in 1565, under a master named Martinus
Crusius.1 At a later period—probably about 1572—he is
said to have become a “ preceptor ” at the town of Mar-
bach, near Ludwigsburg, which itself is at no great distance
from Stuttgart. Among other activities he was occupied
with the collection of precious stones and monuments
which are now in the Stuttgart Library.2- Memorials of
these investigations are still extant in manuscript, but they
do not concern our subject.3 Simon Studion is affirmed
antiquarian work in Wiirtemberg,” and his epigraphical writings are said to
have been examined with great care in modern times. Mr. F. N. Pryce,
of the British Museum, informed me that there is an account of his anti-
quarian activities in Haug: Rémiscue Inscurirren, etc., Bildwerke Wiir-
tembergs, Stuttgart, 1912, but it contains nothing to my present purpose.
There is also a critical review of his epigraphical writings in Corpus Inscr.
Roman., Vol. XIII, Pt. 2, pp. 208, 209.

I have searched the memorials of Martinus Crusius, who did not die
till 1607. He was born in 1526 and was Professor of Greek at Tubingen.
He wrote on Byzantine history and translated Homer into Latin. See
Oratio vz Vira er Onirv. . . . D. Martini Crusn, Tubingensis Academie
per annos octo et quadraginta Professoris nobilissimt ac celebratissimi ... a
elarissimo viro D. Viro My.urro, 1608. Were there time in the world for
everything, some of the Latin treatises of Crusius would repay reading.
One at least on the Heavenly Jerusalem deserves more than the passing
glance by which I have satisfied myself that it contains nothing regarding his
pupils. But Crusius compiled also a Suabian Chronicle—ScuwasiscHER
Curonicx—which seems to have been first published in 1733, and a refer-
ence to Studion will be found in Part III, Bk. XI, cap. xi, p. 311. He is
mentioned again in Moser’s Supplement to the second volume. See p. 78,
in connection with an Historical Calendar of Wiirtemberg.

2 See C. F Sattler: (1) Atucrmzrne GescnicuTe WURTEMBERGS UND
DESSEN ANGRANZENDEN GEBIETHE UND GEGENDEN, etc. 5 Theile, 1764-8 ;
(2) Histortscwe Brscurerpune pes Herzocraums WuRTEMBERG UND ALLER
DESSELBEN STADTE, CLOSTER UND DAZU GEHORIGEN AEMTER, etc. 2 Theile,
1752,

B * See Diz Hisroriscuen HanvscwrirTen Dex KONIGLICHEN OFFENTLICHEN
Oe omEK zu STUTTGART. Beschreiben von Oberstudienrat Dr. W. von Heyd,
ter tbliothekar. Erster Band: Die Handschriften in Folio. Stuttgart,
a 9-90. (1) No. 57 in this Catalogue teads as follows: Vera origo illus-
meine z antiquissime domus W irtembergia, etc., una cum venerandé anti-
gas omanis 1m agro Wirtembergico conquisitis et explicatis monumentis
(2) Noy et labore M. Simonis Stupronzs preceptoris apud Martisbacenses.

9. 137 reads: Ratio nominis et originis antiquissime atque illustrissime

40

-- Page 64 --
Militia Crucifera Evangelica

to have expended great pains and to have received con-
siderable assistance from State grants of funds. He was
more, however, than an antiquarian and virtuoso of his
period. In the year 1586 he was at Liineburg! in Hanover,
where he either convoked or attended a memorable
assembly of a religious character, out of which there arose
the Miuitra Crucirera Evancetica—otherwise, the Evan-
gelical Brotherhood, according to a description in the
Repertorium. The Reperrortum adds (1) that this soon
became “a strong sect” and (2) that it was a branch of
the Rosicrucians, as is “ well known.” C. G. von Murr,
a writer who was contemporary with Bihle, bears the same
testimony.? If this be so, it will have to be admitted—
in however broad a sense—that a Brotherhood or Society
in the likeness of that with which we are dealing—and
are now on the quest of its origin —had been established
in Germany some twenty-eight years prior to the issue
of the first formal Rosicrucian documents, and that this
fact puts an end for ever to the most generally favoured
hypothesis respecting the Order, being that which looks
to the Wiirtemberg theologian Andree as inventor or
founder, after one or another manner. The year 1586
was that of the birth of Andrez.

domus Wirtembergice fideliter inquisita anno nostri salutis 1597 authore
Stmone Stupione Uraceo apud Marpachenses preceptore. See also Ibid.,
Zwetter Band: Die HanpscurirTEN IN Quarro unD Oxtavo. Stuttgart,
1891.—No. 96. Fragment einer Geschichte Schwabens obne Titel, Aufang und
Ende, latetnisch geschrieben von Simon StTuDION.

1 Wigston affirms in Hermes Sretua (1) that Liineberg was “ one of the
head centres of the Rosicrucians ’—but he means the Miriria Crucirera
Evancrrica—and (2) that De Quincey mentions a meeting of them at this
place (p. 51). Asa matter of fact, so far as De Quincey and his original are
concerned, his brief reference to the Mritiria Crucirera Evancetica is by
no means a reference to Rosicrucians.

2 Christoph Gottlieb von Murr is noted as born at Nuremberg in 1733,
and he died on April 8, 1811. His Essay on the T’Rvz Oricin oF THE Rosi-
crucian anD Masonic Orpers—User pen WAHREN URsPRUNG DER RosEn-
KREUZER UND DES FREYMAURER Orpens—appeared in 1803 and had an appendix
on the history of Knights Templar.

41

-- Page 65 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
The allegations concerning Studion and his Mruitia
may be summarised briefly thus: (1) They accepted the
occult teaching and philosophy of Paracelsus on chemistry
and astronomy,' which would mean that the Hermetic
Art was something far more catholic and important for them
than the mere transmutation of metals one into another.
We find also the Fama FraTerniratis discoursing upon
“the ungodly and accursed gold-making,” and claiming
on the part of the Brotherhood “ a thousand better things,’”*
while the Conressio dilates upon “ the worthless books of
pseudo-chemists,” though testifying that it does not “ set
at naught ” the transmutation of metals and “ the supreme
medicine of the world.” ‘This is precisely the position
of Paracelsus. Astronomy of course included for the
Helvetian Master of Secrets the signs and portents of the
heavens, in accordance with which the Conressio talks
of new stars in Serpentarius and Cygnus as “ powerful
signs of a great council” and as evidence that the Book of
Nature stands open for all eyes, though it can be read only
by afew. (2) They looked for the renovation of the earth
and a general reform to come, in other words, a Rosicrucian
universal reformation, the correction of many “ errors
of our arts,” a new order in “ divine and human things ”
and, in fine, an “amendment of philosophy,” which
expectations were also the cause and reason of addressing
the Fama and Conressio to the learned of Europe. (3)
They regarded the revelations of Holy Scripture as intus
et foris scripte—written within and without—like the
tTn her Lire or Paracetsus Miss Stoddart says that the Mruirra elabo-
rated the views of Paracelsus “upon evolution, into an advanced theory.”
There is not a particle of evidence for this and no references are given. The
‘Pecans i" the sixteenth century were not those of the twentieth.
ads of the criticism are (1) that under colour of alchemy “‘ many
Tunagates and roguish people do use great villainies,” and (2) that even men
of discretion are regarding the transmutation of metals as the highest point
of philosophy,
42

-- Page 66 --
Militia Crucifera Evangelica
Book of Nature. (4) They were an ultra-Protestant body,
“heated by apocalyptic dreams,” regarding the Pope as
Antichrist and the Man of Sin—after the best manner
of the Conressio Frarernitatis R .*.C .*. (5) Finally, they
used the symbols of the the Rose and Cross.

Against these arresting points of correspondence we have
to place the fact that the Miziria were ardent Second
Adventists, according to their story, and that this enthusiasm
did not especially characterise the later Order, though its
documents shew certain traces. It constitutes—to my mind
—a point of distinction, as between a transformation of the
schools, effected ex hypothesi by communicating to Western
scholars the treasures of a secret tradition hidden previously
in the East,? and the creation of a new heaven and a new
earth as a result of the Lord of Christendom coming in His
good time to Judgment. The Mizitia Crucirera were con-
cerned therefore with a matter of religion and the enthusiasm
arising out of a particular expectation based on doctrine,
whereas the Order of the Rosy Cross might be said to
cherish as its object the promotion of a religion of science.
The marriage of a reformation in knowledge to a reform
already affected in religious belief was at least their chief aim.
However, as the years went on and a particular construc-
tion of the Book written within and without was not
justified by the Second Advent coming to pass, it would
not be impossible for a certain change of view to take place
in the gospel sect, so that it could reappear under new
auspices and characterised by anew name. The intimation
here put forward is of course tentative in character and
stands as such at its value: it will recur for consideration,
and a conclusion will be reached later. We shall find that

+ Tt will be seen later on that Christian Rosy Cross, the reputed founder
of the Order, went in his youth to the East—that is to say, Arabia—and
there met with wise men, who revealed to him many mysteries, in possession
of which he returned ultimately to Europe.

43

-- Page 67 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
as time went on there was a very good reason for a certain
change of ground.

The Repertorrum Lirrrartum evidently derived its
knowledge of the Mizitia in the main and it would seem
exclusively from an unprinted work of Simon Studion,
entitled Naometria, signifying a mystic measurement—that
is to say, of the Temple—as if a deep understanding
concerning it. The symbolical expression is reminiscent
of Kabalistic or pre-Kabalistic tracts} on the DerineEa-
TION OF THE CELESTIAL TEmpLes, the MeasurEMENT
oF THE Divine Bopy, and R. ElieZer’s MerasureEMENT
oF THE Eartuty ‘Tempte; but the immediate allusion
is to the Apocatypse, X, 1: ‘‘ And there was given
me a reed like a rod: and the angel stood, saying:
Rise, and measure the Temple of God, and the altar, and
them that worship therein.” For this reason the sub-title
of the manuscript is termed “a naked and prime opening
of the book written—within and without 2—by the key
of David and the reed like unto a rod.” The book in
question is presumably that which was sealed with seven
seals, but was opened in heaven by the Lamb, standing
before the Throne of God ;? and Naometrta is said to
be a brief introduction to a knowledge of all mysteries in
Holy Scripture and the universal world. It follows that
Simon Studion, by the claim expressed in his title, had
received the power which was given to the Lion of the
Tribe of Juda and the Root of David. Moreover, by
the guidance of that Morning Star which appeared a.p.
1572, Naomerria embodied a prophecy concerning the
Second Advent of Christ, wherein He would restore His
Church and assume the government of the world, while the
Man of Sin—otherwise, the Pope—being destroyed, to-

* See my Doctrine anp LiveraTure oF THE Kapazan, Bk. IV, § 4, p. 154.

* Cf. “a book written within and on the back side.” Apoc., V, 1. The
Vuucate gives: Et ordi . . . librum scriptum intus et foris.

® Ibid. V, 6. * Ibid, V, 5.

44

-- Page 68 --
Militia Crucifera Evangelica

gether with his son of perdition—meaning Mahomet—
there would be henceforth but one fold and one Shepherd.t

The Reperrorium tells us further (1) that on p. 1673
of his vast manuscript Studion “ derives long and obscure
predictions” from Rose Symbolism, the comment on
which is “true and original Rosicrucian wisdom ” ;
(2) that his descriptions of the Rose and his auguries
drawn therefrom fill many pages; and (3) that con:
cerning the Cross, the people who are termed Crucesignati
and the mysteries relating to them, “he knew so much
that he has occupied two and a half columns with his
table of contents alone.” We hear also—on p. 1177
—that in 1502 a Cross fell among the people in the
Wiirtemberg town of Herrenberg, some of whom are
mentioned by name, together with the other instruments
of the Passion of Christ. Finally, the Reperrorium
records how a certain Tobias Hess belonged—as it was
held—to the Mrzitia and we shall see that he was a
friend of J. V. Andree, who is the chief storm-centre
of Rosicrucian criticism. With all this we may
compare the testimony of C. G. von Murr as follows:
(1) The Naomerria? was divided into two parts and

1 The commentary of the Reperrorrum hereon and on the farrago at
large is that the work is a confused medley of absurd mystic computations,
adorned with a great number of symbols and figures.

2 Naometria was evidently in Latin, whether or not—after the fashion
of such texts at the period—it may have lapsed occasionally into the German
vernacular. The Reperrorium quotes its answer to the question: Quid est
clavis David ? as follows: Est mensuratio seu dimensio omnium, non tam eorum
que in S. Scripturis quam eorum etiam que in rerum universitate, seu in nature
mystertts a condito mundo usque ad ejus finem includuntur. Fit autem ea
dimensio per calamum similem virge quem sibi datum esse, ut metiretur templum
Det et altare ejus et adorantes in eo tpse Johannes Apostolus de sese contestatur.
. . . Quidnam aperitur per eam clavem? ... Liber intus et forts scriptus,
de quo D, Fohannes predicans: Et vidi, ait, in dextra sedentis supra thronum
Librum scriptum intus et foris signatum sigillis septem, etc. It follows in the
obscure and contradictory symbolism that the Key of David is the rod with
which the seer of Patmos made his measurements, but that, in addition to
measuring, it opened also the Book with Seven Seals.

45

-- Page 69 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

four sections. (2) It contained 1790 pages, not in-
cluding the preface or the dedication to Frederick,
Duke of Wiirtemberg, which account together for another
205 pages; (3) it is an interlocutory discourse between
Nathanael and Cleophas, presumably imaginary characters ;
(4) its reflections on the renewal of the earth and a general
reformation to come breathe the Rosicrucian spirit ; and
(5) it embodies real Rosicrucian doctrine. As regards
Tobias Hess it appears, however, that he did not authorise
his friend Andrez to allude openly to himself in the matter
of the Minitia. It is certain that Von Murr was acquainted
with Naometria at first hand and not only by reflection
from the Reperrorrum.!' He is, therefore, the second
witness whom I have cited.

We are now in the presence of that concrete fact to
which I referred at the beginning of the present chapter, and
we have found two direct or eye-witnesses testifying that in
the year 1604 there was completed a work which is Rosicrucian
in respect of doctrine and symbolism. The available sum-
mary of contents bears out these statements, and I have
been able to indicate several strongly marked points of
correspondence with known Rosicrucian teaching. So also
the title of Naomerria, which idiotically designates the
prophet of Islam as the spiritual son of the Pope, recalls
the Conressio Fraternitatis R -.C -. and its pretentious
condemnation of the East and West—“ meaning the Pope
and Mahomet.” We find under both denominations that
the Rosy Cross signifies a gospel zealotry which recalls
those later prophets, Cumming and Baxter, concerning the

+ The Reperrorium says in its crude way that of all “ objects and forms”
none seemed more significant and mysterious to visionaries like those of the
Mittra than Roses and Crosses; that what is written in Naometria is
“ quite in the spirit of the Rosicrucians ”. and that the Minttia was
evidently a branch of that body, or something made in its likeness. But
me Miuitta and its Naomerria anteceded the manifest epoch of the Rosy

Toss and were therefore its first stage or ts prototypes.
46

-- Page 70 --
Militia Crucifera Evangelica

number of the beast and all the spiritual harlotry of the
Scarlet Woman. We know that out of such things there
evolves nothing but the mania in which they are begotten.
It is not of Paracelsus nor of alchemy—physical or mystical ;
it is not of the inward meaning behind the Holy Scriptures,
nor of that traditional history embodied by the Fama
FRATERNITATIS, which—as we shall see in its proper place
—has been construed under other auspices into a real
legend of initiation. A very curious literary document is
this legend, a jewel in the brummagem setting of Reforma-
tion rubbish, those lees and dregs of the Luther aftermath,
expressed in terminology to which Luther would have
scarcely stooped. At this stage I need only add that the
setting fell off quickly. So also the Second-Advent motive
which appears to have marked Naomertria with distinctive
but once familiar seals remains only as a faint vestige when
Rosicrucian manifestoes begin to appear in print. This
has been intimated already. I may add that at a very early
stage there were manifestations of grave doubts as to the
kind of official religion which was professed in reality by
the Brethren, and—as if they protested too much—it was
suggested that they were the opposite of that which they
appeared.

We have no means of knowing the date of Simon Studion’s

1 According to Charles Mackay—Memorrs or ExtTraorpinary PopuLar
Dexustons—the Jesuit Abbé Gaultier was at the pains of writing a book to
prove that the Fraternity was Lutheran : one would have thought it proved
sufficiently by the published documents of the Order. On the other hand,
according to Kazauer, the letters F..R..C.. signified Fratres Religtonis
Calvinistice. But finally Raphael Eglinus—Disquisitio pe Hera ARTISTA,
1615—is said to have affirmed that the R...C.-. were a Catholic Fraternity.
I mention this as an illustration of the kind of bibliographical quests which
I have been called upon to follow in the course of this involved inquiry.
The disquisition in question was written in answer to two Jesuit writers on
the transmutation of metals, and an editio postrema correctior et melior was
published at Marburg, so far back as 1608. As there is little need to say at
that date, the Rosicrucians are not mentioned, while much less is there any
discussion of their official religion,

47

-- Page 71 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
departure from this life. He would have been some sixty-
seven years old in 1610, when there is reason to know
that the Fama Fraterniratis was circulated in manuscript
form. He may still have been hale and vigorous when it
was printed in 1614, and in this case it is barely possible
that we may not have to look so far for its authorship as
some have been wont to do. The first person who—
historically speaking—married the Rose and Cross in
symbolism may stand behind the figure of Christian Rosy
Cross in the traditional story of the Order. We have also
no means of ascertaining how things fared with the Minit1a
after 1586. The Repertorium says—and we know on
our part already 1—that it became a strong sect, but its
sole annals * are in Naometria,® or at least I have sought
vainly for other reports concerning it. German literature
seems equally reticent on the subject of Tobias Hess, who
—as we have seen—is stated to have been one of its members.
I have found only one other memoria! concerning him.

2 So also Von Murr, who calls them “a peculiar sect.”

2 It seems, in fact, the only printed authority for “the great gathering
at Luneburg.”

* The Latin title follows: Naomerria, seu nuda et prima Libri, intus et
Soris scripti per clavem Davidis et calamum virge similem, Apertio: In qua
non tantum ad cognoscenda tam 8. Scripture totius quam Nature quoque
universe Mysteria brevis sit Introductio. Verum etiam Prognosticus (Stelle
illius Matutine Anno Domini 1572 conspecte ductu) demonstratur Adventus
ille Christi ante Diem Novissimum Secundus, per quem, Homine Peccatt, Papa,
cum filio suo perditionis Mahometo, divinitus devastate, ipse Ecclesiam suam et
principatus mundt restaurabit, ut im iis post hac sit cum ovili Pastor Unus. In
Crucifere Militia Evangelice gratiam, authore SimonE STUDIONE inter Scor-
piones. Pars Prima. Interlocutores NarHANAEL, CLeoPHas. Anno i604. The
second part followed, but is not specified in the title. There was also an
Appendix, which is described thus: Hisrociypuicus Srmonts STuDIONIs
versus de C bristiana et fatali subequestris Ordinis titulo duorum Serenissimorum
Heroum, primum Henrici IV, Navarre et Francia, deinde Facobi Anglia,
Regum, cum D. D, Frederico Duce Wirtemb + inita con feederatione, a JOHANNE
Bravuart, Schole Marpachiane Collega sex vocum cantu, gratulationts loco,
concinnatt.

4 Joannis Valentini Andrez : Memorauta, BenevoLentium Honor,
Amori eT Conpo.entim pata. Argentorati. Anno 1619. The second com-

48

-- Page 72 --
Militia Crucifera Evangelica

I come now to that which, for so long a time, has
been the crux of the whole subject. The author of
the Essay in the Reprrrorium fails to mention the
location of Naometria at the time that he was able
to consult it, nearly two centuries after the date of its
completion. Von Murr also fails. Bihle makes no pre-
tence of original research on the subject and simply reflects
his authority. It was seen and consulted by C. F. Nicolai
in or before 18061 and was then at Stuttgart, where
Studion’s antiquarian papers are still preserved, according
to the printed catalogues already cited. On this basis
I applied to the Landesbibliothek of that city and have
learned that it has two copies: (1) Cop. THEOL. ET PHILOS.,
No. 34, in folio, and (z) Cop. THEOL. ET PHILOs., No. 23,
in quarto. A verification sought subsequently of chief
statements made by the old witnesses has proved negative
and is therefore left regretfully to the care of those who
can investigate on the spot. ‘There is presumably no
doubt whatever that the RererTorium account is genuine
throughout—all errors and omissions excepted: there is
no ground on which it can be relegated to the region
of wilfulinvention. We have also the evidence of Melchior
Fischlin, to which I have referred in a note. The very
title of Naometria and the exceedingly characteristic
additamenta connected therewith bear all the marks of
sincerity on the part of those who have described. Under
memoration concerns Tostas Hessi, wiri incomparabilis, immortalitas.
Born January 31, 1568; 0b. November 24, 1614. It is a long panegyric
and I note this only: At hic calumnia iripudiare, bic jactare se illa,
et que in Chymico nequicquam dentes impresserat, nunc Naometram,
nunc Chiltasten, nunc somniatorem deprehendisse, ovans. Vide p. 63. It
is a document of unspeakable dullness, an expatiation which tells us
nothing.

1 See ernice BEMERKUNGEN UBER Ursprune unpD GrscHICHTE DER RosEn-
KREUZER UND FRrEIMAURER Orpens, Berlin, 1806, p. 91. It was written in
reply to Biihle.

E 49

-- Page 73 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

all proper reserves arising from the fact that I have not
seen the MSS., I am satisfied that the Brotherhood of
the Rosy Cross was in embryo prior to the year 1604 and
that Naometria was its first memorial. An occult
evangelical fraternity—-a kind of spiritual chivalry—in
respect of official religious belief, interpretation of astro-
nomical signs and use of symbols, it is substantially
identical with the record of the later Order, though
somewhat distinguished therefrom by its Second Advent
concern.

For the possible inward réason of this distinction we
derive an unexpected light from the little monograph of
the third witness, namely, Melchior Fischlin, my examina-
tion of which has been postponed for this reason to the
present place. He tells us that the work of Simon Studion
on the subject-matter of Naometria was in hand prior
to 1593, for in January of that year the author was cited
by Ludovicus, Duke of Wirtemberg, to bring forward
what he had affirmed therein respecting the Papacy. In
this manner it transpired that Studion had committed
himself to three prophecies concerning the immediate
future: (r) that the last Pope would be crucified in 1612 ;
(2) that among those who should condemn him to this death
would be a future Frederic, Duke of Wirtemberg ;
and (3) that the Second Advent would take place
in 1620. Unfortunately for this notable forecast, the
German Duke in question predeceased the supposed
event in 1608, and such as it was therefore under
the auspices of Naomerria, the Rosy Cross had
to revise its scheme. It would be subsequently to
this that the Fama Frarerniratis was devised, and it
came to pass soon after, in view of the testimony according
to which, as we shall see, Adam Haselmeyer had seen and
read it in MS. in 1610. Otherwise there would be no
reason to suppose that it anteceded 1612, which year

50

-- Page 74 --
Militia Crucifera Evangelica
passed quietly away, so far as the Sovereign Pontiff was
concerned.}

Tue Wtrremserc Reposirory preceded the work of
Bihle by a considerable number of years, and its memorial
on the Rosy Cross was calculated to furnish material for
extracts and summaries in several directions, or alternatively
there were other records of which I can find no trace,
outside Fischlin. It is probably in this way that Nicholas
de Bonneville heard a rumour concerning Naomerria and
fell into confusion respecting it, so far back as 1784, for
in a work on the Jesuits in Masonry he assigns the manuscript
of Studion to Dr. John Dee.? From this time forward,
with the help of Professor Bihle, but above all of De
Quincey in England and America, the report of NaomETRIA
and its maker has been variously reflected, and we meet
on rare occasions with a witness who speaks as if he had
really seen the manuscript ; but he is only enlarging on

1 | append the text of Fischlin: Anno 1593, d. 24 Martii, utpote prim,
die azymorum, quem observavit, primum Naometrict laboris specimen protultt
in Curiam d. 15 Fanuarit ejusdem anni a Ludovico Wirtemb. Duce citatus
ut ea que in opere suo contra Papatum collegerat, secum apportaret et quid fier,
oporteat audiret. Ab eo tempore miserrime se ab inimicts exagitatum conqueritur.
De cetero, quia de futuris vaticinabatur, tdque ex numeris, domum remissus
inceptum opus absolutt anno 1604... . Ineo omnia mysteria que in 8. Scriptura
presertim Ezechiele, Daniele, Apocalypst leguntur, per numeros mire explicare
conatur et omnino prophetam agere presumit; falsus autem fuit in tribus
pracipuis ; ultimum Papam anno 1612 cructfixum tri; inter crucifixores ejus
Frederic., Ducem Wirtemb. (qui jam anno 1608 vivis excessit) fulurum ;
denique adventum Christi ad regnum Chiltasticum circa anno 1620.

* Les Jésurres Cuassi’s pe LA FRANCMAGONNERIE ET LEUR POIGNARD BRiSE
par LES Macons. Orient de Londres, 1784. See Pt. I, p. 123, in a note on
John Dee. It explains that Naomerria signifies Measure of the Vessel,
otherwise Measure of the Temple. Dee is described also as the author of a
tract entitled Fascrcutus Cuymicus, which, however, is the work of his son,
Arthur Dee. The date of De Bonneville’s volume is notable in connection
with that of Tus Wurremserc Reposirory, and the question arises whether
the Frenchman borrowed from the slightly antecedent German work and
got into confusion about it or derived from some misleading report at
second-hand. It seems certain, in any case, that his source was not Melchior
Fischlin.

Lys

-- Page 75 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

the notice which lies already before us. ‘Thus Kieswetter
explains that the title signifies a new worship of the inner
and outer temple, that is, a mystical description of man
visible and invisible, phenomenal and noumenal, the true
Temple of God.t

In the year 1905, and in America, a writer who styled
himself Count St. Vincent and “ Supreme Master of the
Order,” produced a volume entitled tautologically Tue
Orper Miritra Crucirera Evancetica, otherwise SOLDIERS
OF THE CruciFIxion, according to his amazing rendering.
It affirms that this spiritual chivalry was founded by Simon
Studion in 1587, being thirty-eight years before he happens
to have been born, and even then—adds Vincent—it was
not the beginning of the Order, which had pre-existed
apparently under another name. It is represented as
issuing a Manifesto at Liineburg in 1530, of which a
“liberal” translation is given. It proves, however, so
liberal that it can only be characterised as embodying claims,
every line of which betrays itself. It comprises: (1)
A disjointed preamble, in which the Brethren are supposed
to testify that they can no longer believe [sic] “in the
universal Catholic religion as taught by our priests”; that
the Pope is the Man of Sin (travestied from the title of
Naomerria) ; that the Book of Revelation [sic] is written
within and without (compare ibid.) ; that it contains the
“true secret of alchemy”; that the Universal Medicine
includes the Catholicon or Elixir of Life and the Panacea,
the first insuring to its possessor the prolongation or
perpetuity of existence, the second restoring strength and
health to debilitated or diseased organisms; that the
Philosopher’s Stone is “ the great and universal synthesis ”

1 History of the Rosicrucians in Tux Spuynx, already cited. Kieswetter
alludes also to Studion’s mystical allegories and apocalyptic calculations,
which he terms “ perfectly unintelligible ”—an expression transferred from
the Repyrrorium,

52

-- Page 76 --
Militia Crucifera Evangetica

(a form of expression unknown in the sixteenth century).
(2) A list of Rules, which have been taken—sometimes
literally and sometimes varied or transposed—from the
Laws of the Rosicrucian Society as published by Sincerus
Renatus in 1710, these having no connection with the
Miuitia of Studion. (3) A Pledge imposed on a new
Brother, as given by Renatus in Law No. 45, but much
altered and extended. (4) A Creed of the Order, which is
modern and expressed in the English characteristic of the
self-styled Count St. Vincent.

The script of a second manifesto is furnished also and
is claimed to belong to the year 1598. Supposing that
one could distinguish degrees in the products of such
a mint, it would be accurate to characterise this rescript
as still more ridiculous than the former, for the first at
least was taken in the main from the work of Sincerus
Renatus, whereas the second appears to be invention pure
and simple. The preamble discourses of (1) students of
the occult ; (2) liberty of conscience ; (3) clerical “‘ prosecu-
tion” [sic] and esoteric Christianity ; (4) the unity of spirit
in all mankind ; (5) the power of strong imagination; and
(6) change from one plane to another. In a word, it gives
expression to purely modern ideas, expressed in the familiar
terms of current occultism on its most confused side. The
replicas of Count St. Vincent are everywhere in the scheme
of notions which are to be met with in the frivolities and
brummagem of so-called “‘ progressive thought”; but the
pseudonymous Count is usually more banal, and much more
contradictory than are his peers and co-heirs in these “ fore-
most files”? of folly. The preamble is followed by sixteen
tautological rules, some of which stultify themselves, as for
example (1) that no man or woman shall be accepted as
members, but “‘ they may be elected should they insist ” ;
and (2) that a brother should work with a stranger rather
than with one of the Order, because “ no two men can

53

-- Page 77 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
work together for any length of time without thinking
less of each other ”’—a caution which can justify nothing
but work performed alone. These Rules are followed by
“an oath” which travesties Masonic Obligations at the
expense of English.

We have seen, however, that the Count St. Vincent is
Supreme Master of the Order; but his incapacity for
rational expression leaves it doubtful whether this qualifica-
tion applies to the Western world, as we hear also of a
Grand Master in the East and of a Grand Lodge which
has chartered one in America. The result has been two
American manifestoes, published respectively in 1g02 and
1903, but about both I shall need only to say that they
incorporate considerable materials derived from Eliphas
Levi.

54

-- Page 79 --
CHAPTER III
ALCHEMISTS AND MYSTICS

Tue antiquity claimed by the Order of the Rosy Cross
in its original documents is that of the allegorical legend,
which represents C ..R -.C .. as having been born in 1378 *
and having established his Fellowship as an incorporation
of four persons, himself included, at an entirely uncertain
date subsequent to his return from the East. ‘There is no
sense of concern in antiquity per se, except in so far as it
might serve to shew that schemes of reform were ante-
cedent to the age of Luther. Even so, within the measures
of the Fama Fraternitatis, the claim was made on behalf
of science and the arts, rather than on that of religion. The
maker of this document—let us say, in or about the year
1609—was content with the Christian faith as he found it,
under the providence of the Confession of Augsburg—
anno 1530—or some analogous Protestant standard. For
the rest, Rosicrucian philosophy and occult Rosicrucian
knowledge were derived by the hypothesis of their legend

1 Yarker alludes to some copy of an old manuscript in the possession of
a German, to whom he will refer later, but does not seem to doso. He fell
rather easily into lapses of this kind, not as the result of intention, but owing
to a confused mind. The manuscript claimed to be of the year 1374, or
alternatively this antiquity was advanced on behalf thereof. Furthermore,
it is affirmed to mention the Fraternitas Ros@ (sic) Crucis precisely four
years prior to the alleged birth of C ...R .-. C+. which notwithstanding, the
statement seems to have been quite satisfactory for the author of Tue
Arcane Scuoous. I have followed the quest of this obscure treatise and
have found that Yarker’s information is derived from Der Rosenxreuzer
IN SEINER Biésse, under the name of Magister Pianco. I shall recur in its
place to the subject : here it is sufficient to say that the date is not historical,

55

-- Page 80 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

from the near East of Arabia and are described literally
in terms which were familiar to learned persons at the period
through the claims of Kabalism. They were received
—ex hypothesi—by Adam after his Fall, were transmitted
in the hiddenness to Moses and Solomon through Enoch
and Abraham, were perpetuated not less secretly through
subsequent ages and were the heritage which C..R.C..
offered to his companions and—by their intermediation—
to’the elect thereafter at large. In this manner the philo-
sophical and theosophical position of the Rosy Cross ab origine
symboli emerges with unchallengeable clearness ; it belonged
to the school of Mirandula, Reuchlin, Riccius and Arch-
angelus de Burgo Nuova, or in other words to the line of
Christian Kabalists who believed that Zoharic literature,
its connections and dependencies, bore testimony to the
fact that the expected Messiah of Israel had come in Christ.
Supplementary hereunto there was unquestionably all that
which. is included by the so-called practical part of Kabal-
ism and is comprehended under the generic term of
Magia—the power of Divine Names, the art of invocation
based thereon, the doctrine of correspondence between
things above and below, of occult virtues and sympathies,
of communication with spirits, but especially with those
which—according to the Fama—are “ commonly called the
dwellers in the Elements,” and finally the transmutation
of metals, followed in other ways than were set forth by
the current literature of alchemy. Within this compass
lies that projected reformation in arts and sciences of which
we hear in the early memorials. The immediate fons et
origo of all is to be sought in Paracelsus, but he is not the
only source.

Now, the concern which was destined to overshadow
and almost absorb the rest proved to be that of alchemy,
and it comes about in this manner that the term Rosicrucian
has been used synonymously and interchangeably with that

56

-- Page 81 --
Alchemists and Mystics

of Alchemist, from the eighteenth century and onward
to our own day. Both in reverie and practice, Germany
was the chief stronghold of the art of transmutation, with
Paracelsus for its central figure, Imperator and prophet-
in-chief. When the sixteenth century melted into the
century which followed, he came to be regarded by some
of his disciples as himself that Elias Artista whose advent
had been foretold by him, as the great revealer of mysteries,
who was at once past and to come, the German Hermes,
“the noble, beloved Monarch.” ! As past he was “‘ of
blessed memory,” while his return was to be in the light
of prepared minds—for in a spacious time to come they
should be filed and refreshed by his doctrines, which were
destined—in the dream—to prevail over all others in the
world of Hermetic thought. Of faith and devotion like
this a marked instance is offered by Benedictus Figulus.
Paracelsus was for him removed indeed in the flesh but was
ultimately coming into his own through an increased under-
standing and acceptance.’

We must remember that at this date the theosophical
light of Jacob Bohme had been uplifted over the German

1 The prophecy mentioned in the text was like a talisman to the Hermetic
school in Germany, among greater and lesser alike. In THe Boox concERN-
ING THE TINCTURE OF PuinosoPuers, having dealt with Arcana which exhibit
transmutations, Paracelsus affirms that the rumours concerning the Tincture
and the art thereof are enveloped by a certain concealment, which the
Almighty has given for their protection, “even to the coming of Elias the
Artist, at which time there shall be nothing so occult that it shall not be
revealed.” (Cap. IV.) The prophecy recurs in other writings of the
“Monarch of Arcana,” and the Messiah of Hermetic Mysteries was ex-
pected ardently by several successive generations. When the mysterious
adept, who “looked like a native of Holland,” knocked at the door of
Helvetius, as narrated in Virutus Aureus, he concluded that Elias had come,
in view of the practical warrants which his unknown visitor carried.

2 See A GoLpEN anp Burssep Casxer or Nature’s Marvets, one of the
collections of Figulus, in which Paracelsus is called “ our dear Preceptor,”
“our highly favoured Monarch,” and the “noble, beloved Philosopher,
Trismegistus.” I refer to the English translation, edited by myself in 1893,
and especially pp. 21, 26-9, as regards the panegyric of Paracelsus.

57

-- Page 82 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
world, and it calls to be mentioned here because of the
particular witness which his revelations bore to a spiritual
understanding of the alchemical work and its symbolism.
It was not that he established any school of interpretation,
for the school—if such it can be called—was old already
in the world ; but he gave it a new impulsion and exercised
the more influence because he was not concerned in any
formal or deliberate manner with the general thesis of
alchemy. He held up a glass of vision, under which the
age-long familiar images appeared in a new atmosphere
and seemed to radiate deeper meanings. By the hypo-
thesis, they had belonged always to a Divine Art, whatever
their modes and aspects; but Bohme’s method exhibited
the immanent Divinity shining through all the veils.?
For him also the theosophical secrets of the Magnum Opus
irradiated on every side the text of the Old and New
Testaments. Jacob Béhme was born at Gérlitz in 1575

1 The editor of an American periodical under the familiar title of Nores
and Quertss, June, 1907, reproduces a “ Rosicrucian Chronology,” de-
rived chiefly from the fabulous materials collected by Dr. Westcott and
other luminaries of the Masonic Rosicrucian Society. Under the date 1612,
it is said that about this time “ Jacob BOhme was baptised by a Rosicrucian,”
and refers to “the collaborator of Béhme’s work,” an expression to which
no assignable meaning attaches. J. G. Gichtel—born in 1638 and died in
1710—may be counted as an early editor, and Dionysius Freher was a com-
mentator: they did much respectively for the collection and annotation of
the Teutonic theosophist’s writings ; but he had no collaborator on earth.
There is not one particle of evidence to shew that he was ever received into
anything, except the Church of Luther, that he was ever baptised by anyone,
except a Lutheran minister. The persons who make statements of this
kind are not worthy of credit except by a jury of Bedlamites, but theirs is the
quality of evidence which is borne always and everywhere in the history of
occultism, so far as it has been written by occultists. As I have mentioned
Gichtel, it may be added that he has been connected with the foundation
of an Order of Angelic Brethren, otherwise a Society of the Thirty, which
according to Woodford—see Kenning’s CycLopmp1a or Freemasonry—
was still in existence at the beginning of the nineteenth century and had
Rosicrucian teaching. It is almost needless to say that no authority is cited,
but if the ‘statement could be accepted in its absence we should not be
warranted in supposing that the Gichtel foundation had such teaching at
the beginning.

58

-- Page 83 --
Alchemists and Mystics

and died at the same town of Upper Silesia in 1624. He
saw therefore the genesis and development of Rosicrucian
claims, and their first epoch was closing at the time that he
passed away. His book on the root of theology, philosophy
and “astral science,” under the title of Aurora, belongs
to the years 1610-12, and it was known somewhat widely
by the circulation of copies in manuscripts prior to the
publication of the Fama, which appears also to have been
going from place to place in the same manner, at much
about the same time. As there is a story that Bohme in
his boyhood was visited by a strange old man who took
him by the hand and told him that he should become
* such an one as at whom the world shall wonder,’ he is
alleged by pseudo-historians to have been in the keeping
of the Rosy Cross, to have been brought within the secret
circle and even to have been a prominent member.

The Béhme affirmation belongs to the region of casual
rumour and unblushing speculation which environs my
whole subject. Whatsoever came into the nets which were
cast at random into the waters of research proved good
fish for the makers of foolish memorials, and every catch
was as much material on the market to be raked over by
the next comer, whether or not he had been at the pains
of fishing a little on his own account. In this manner the
supposititious finds have done duty over and over again,
and the more frequently they have passed from hand to
hand, the less has anyone been disposed to call them in
question.2. Moreover, the subject itself was by its nature

1 See Tue Lirz or Jacos Boum, pp. xii, xiii, prefixed to THe Worx
or Jacos Béume, so-called edition of William Law, 4 vols. 4to, 1764-81.
This is evidently the root of the fable concerning a baptism. Jacob was
serving in the shop of his master, and the mysterious stranger insisted on
buying a pair of shoes, after which he called the youth into the street and
gave him the message that [have quoted. The story is Jacob’s, and I suspect
that the latter part at least took place in one of his visions.

4 Perhaps the most typical examples are: (1) Raymundus Lullius and
his Rex phystcorum ; (2) the legend concerning Comte de Falkenstein ; and

59

-- Page 84 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

only too open to uncritical adaptations. The title of Rosy
Cross represented a Secret Order; it dealt in metallic
transmutation, and alchemy was a cryptic literature: to
merge one into another was more easy than the descent
of Avernus. It happened also that certain Hermetic
Masters appealed on occasion to their pledges,’ whence
it was concluded (1) that they obtained their knowledge
by the path of initiation ; and (2) that the initiating centre
was the Order of the Rosy Cross. Again there are bona fide
traces of mystical and other associations in Germany and
elsewhere during the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.
Some of them were presumably more or less secret in
character, but we know next to nothing about them; #?
some were a loose incorporation within the bonds of a
common enthusiasm, e.g. the Brethren of the Common
Life. I do not suppose for a moment that there was one
of them which was secret in the sense claimed by the Rosi-
crucian Order, or even by modern Masonry; they were
of the nature of sects or schools, in comparison with which
the Monastic Orders, with their conventual houses and the
curriculum maintained within them, bear outward marks
(3) Dee’s supposed dedication of Roger Bacon’s Episroza to the Brethren
of the Rosy Cross, which have been disposed of once and for all in my first
chapter.

1 It would be possible to collect a considerable catena of references in
illustration of this fact, yet it would leave the whole question open. The
pledges were either given to an incorporated Secret Society or by the pupil
to his individual master. Now, it so happens that there is no particle of
evidence to guide our choice between these alternatives, except that the
alchemists refer occasionally to their Masters and never to a Secret Order
of which they were members, There is no question that the Hermetic
Secrets—whatever their value—were communicated from keeper to heir—
sometimes in articulo mortis, as in the case of Elias Ashmole.

* Compare C. A. Thory: Acta Latomoroum, 2 vols., 1815. He mentions
old German Secret Societies and a Hermetic Degree called Yeldes, a term
to which I can attach no meaning. We hear otherwise of a mystical sect,
said to have been established by Steinbach in the sixteenth century and to
have been suppressed circa 1566, after being attacked by a pastor named

utz.
60

-- Page 85 --
Alchemists and Mystics
of a more considerable mystery. But the drag-net to which
I have alluded has taken in all these sources and the hand
of the Rosy Cross has been seen in all, for the purpose of
furnishing it with the credentials of a spurious antiquity.*

We shall see in what manner the particular concerns of
material and mystical alchemy entered into the general
dedication of the Rosy Cross. Prior to Jacob Béhme there
was a more direct and representative exponent of both
aspects in the person of Heinrich Khunrath. The name
may signify little but a vague portent to most readers in
England, except in so far as I have attempted on my own
part to make it less unfamiliar. Khunrath’s record in
Hermetic archives is either in the Latin or German
languages, while he was disposed to the disastrous literary
fashion set by Paracelsus a few years previously: that is
to say, he interspersed his Latin with German, and vice
versa, so that he is a crux to the reader of either language
only, not to speak of his other difficulties, which are common,
less or more, to the subject. Even for an alchemist he
was of a strange and exotic kind, and because of certain
symbolical plates which are attached to his chief work he
has been connected with the Rosicrucian Brotherhood,
either as a precursor or a member.? Eliphas Lévi says

1 The purpose is served occasionally by the myth direct. For example,
according to Karl Kieswetter, Johann Karl Friesen was Imperator of the
Rosicrucian Order in 1468. The authority is another of his unique MSS.,
this time under the title of Cuavis Saprentim, or DiaLocure BETWEEN
Wispom anp AN Important Discrpte. It contains a collection of alchemical
processes, which Kieswetter terms precious, adding that some of them were
divulged by John Kunckel von Léwenstern, 1633-1702, the discoverer of
phosphorus. I have not been able to trace the Dialogue, though I have
heard of it in a printed form. It would belong to the great output of the
seventeenth century and would certainly not contain the alleged Rosicrucian
teference, which is peculiar to the alleged MS.

2 Prior to the period of Eliphas Lévi the ascription rested solely on the
so-called Rose-Pantacle, which is one of the page plates illustrating the
AmpuiTHeaTRUM, Subsequently to that time it is referable to the French
occultist’s imaginative use of words.

61

-- Page 86 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

that he deserves on every consideration to be hailed as
a Sovereign Prince Rose-Croix, but this calls to be under-
stood in a symbolical and not the historical sense—as if
it were a point of fact respecting the Order and its head-
ship. The brilliant French occultist specifies indeed
that he applies the title scientifically or mystically, much
as it might be conferred on himself, and as he has said
that he would seek to merit it.2 In any case he did not use
it by allusion to the historical Order.

Khunrath was an illuminated Christian Kabalist, and
in so far as the Secret Doctrine of the Brotherhood shewed
forth the mystical theosophy of Israel under the light of
the New and Eternal Covenant, so far the author of THE
AMPHITHEATRE OF Erernat Wispom is on common ground
with Rosicrucians and was to this extent their precursor.
Being also, as I have said, an alchemist, though bizarre
in his manner of expression, so far as the Fraternity repre-
sented Hermetic Mysteries—which it did indeed and
certainly—so far it was in sufficiently near relationship
to the German Hermetic philosopher. But Khunrath was
born in Saxony about the year 1560; he died in 1601
before Rosicrucianism had emerged—at least definitely—
above the horizon of history; and there is no evidence

1 “ He is a Sovereign Prince of the Rosy Cross, worthy in all respects of
this scientific and mystical titl:.” And concerning AMPHITHEATRUM: “A
more complete and perfect initiation cannot be found elsewhere, unless it
isin the SepHer Yerzirau and Zonar. (See History or Macic, Bk. V, c. 4.)
I have quoted from my own translation, published in 1913 and reprinted
in 1922.

2 “ Albeit we have received initiation only from God and our researches,
we shall keep the secrets of transcendental Freemasonry as we keep our own
secrets. Having attained by our endeavours to a grade of knowledge which
imposes silence, we regard ourselves as pledged by our convictions even more
than by an oath. Science is a noblesse qui oblige, and we shall in no wise fail
to deserve the princely crown of the Rosy Cross.”—Op. cit., Bk. V, c. 7.
It should be added that Prince Rose-Croix was and is the title of perfection
conferred on members of the Eighteenth Degree under the old Rite of Per-
fection, merged subsequently in the Scottish Rite.

62

-- Page 87 --
Alchemists and Mystics

(2) that he was concerned in any secret movement which
led up to its foundation or (6) that he caused its ante-
cedent existence to transpire, supposing it to be much
older than the available records shew. One student
of the subject with whom I was once in correspondence—
Dr. George Cantor, of Halle—even went so far in the
opposite direction as to suggest that there is a veiled
attack upon Khunrath in the Conrzssio FRATERNITATIS
R..C.. under the disguise of a stage-player “ with sufficient
ingenuity for imposition.” 1 But this tract belongs to the
year 1615, when the death of the supposed subject of
reference should have tended to shield his memory, while
the long period that had elapsed would have removed
all point from the allusion, which is obviously to some
man of the moment. Moreover, the obscurity of Khun-
rath, when he was yet alive, renders the proposition ridicu-
lous ; and finally the posthumous publication of the AMPpHI-
THEATRUM ?—a work delineating nothing but the mystical
aspects of alchemy—should have drawn rather than re-
pelled a Society which had protested against “ ungodly
and accursed gold-making.”

There is some evidence in his books that Khunrath was
irascible and abusive—like Thomas Vaughan—in dealing
with those from whom he differed; but there is nothing
tangible to shew that he made any figure at his period.

1 This subject is postponed for consideration in a later chapter. I need
say here only that the denominations of “stage-player”? and man of
“ingenuity” are about the last which could be applied reasonably to
Khunrath.

* AMPHITHEATRUM SAPIENTI® /ETERNE solius vere, Christiano-Kabbalisti-
cum, Divino-Magicum, nec non Physico-Chemicum, Tertriunum, Catholicon :
instructore Henrico Kuunratu, etc. Hanover, 1609. Lenglet du Fresnoy
says that there were several editions, including one at Magdeburg in 1608,
but I have not been able to trace them. ‘They extend in their legend from
that alleged to have been published at Prague in 1598 to that of Hamburg
in 1710. The posthumous character of the work is made more probable by
the fact that the only known edition was produced by an editor, namely,
E. Wolfart.

63

-- Page 88 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
How obscure indeed he was seems evident from the few
facts which have transpired concerning him. He was a
native of Saxony, who led the errant life of so many strug-
gling physicians before his day and after. Having taken
degrees at Basle, he made a certain stay at Hamburg and
settled ultimately at Dresden, where he is said to have
died in poverty at forty-two years of age. He published
three small alchemical tracts in 1§99: one was entitled
Symsotum Puysico-Cuemicum; another was on the
Catholic Magnesia of the Philosophers ; and the third was
on the alchemical Azoru, by which he understood the
First Matter of creation—otherwise, the Mercury of the
Wise.1. One of these works at least was reprinted in the
eighteenth century, but there is nothing to suggest that they
were important at their own epoch, in the opinion of that
epoch. His really memorable treatise did not appear till
1609. He is to be distinguished from Conrad Khunrath,
a contemporary writer on the distillatory art and the
Magian fire, whose works began to be collected in 1605,
but they are not of consequence to our subject.?- It was the
AMPHITHEATRE oF ErernaL Wispom which occasioned the
glowing panegyrics by Eliphas Lévi, who chose also for
a motto on the title-page of his Hisrory or Macic a
definition which Khunrath gives of his own book: Opus
hierarchicum et catholicum—a catholic and_ hierarchic
work. Lévi points out, however, that in the matter
of official religion, the German theosopher was a resolute
protestant, adding that herein he was “a German of
his period rather than a mystic citizen of the eternal

* Symsoium Puysico-Curmicum, Hanover, 1599; Macnesta CaTHorica
Purtosopnorum, Magdeburg, 1599; Conressto pe Cuao Puystco-CHEmMr
corum CaTHoLico, Strasburg, 1599.

* Meputza DesriuzaTorta et Mepica appeared in 1594. The two
writers have been confused together, but Conrad seems to have survived
Khunrath for many years. Professor Ferguson suggests that they were
brothers, offering no evidence.

64

-- Page 89 --
Alchemists and Mystics

kingdom.” ! This is the dictum of a magnus Apollo rather
than an apologia ; but Lévi recognised assuredly that on
another side of his nature Khunrath abode in the freedom
of a spiritual Zion and not under the zgis of reform—in
Germany or otherwhere. I have long felt that his
apocalyptic presentation of the Kabalistic and Hermetic
Mystery should be known among Students of the Doctrine
in England; but the brief notice which is possible in the
present place can only summarise the design. It will
illustrate one understanding of alchemy which occupied
the precincts and threshold of the Rosy Cross at the end
of the sixteenth century.

As an exponent of the Hermetic doctrine of analogy,
Khunrath believed in the physical Stone of Philosophy,
but in his chief work at least he was concerned with the
mystical side. He delineates the process as follows: (1)
Purification of the personal part, that we may attain the
vision of God; but he means that this vision is within
and is a Presence in the hidden sanctuary of our noumenal
being. (2) The closing of the avenues of sense, stillness of
soul, sanctification, illumination, tincture by Divine Fire.
(3) Hereof is the path of attainment, and it will be seen
that it is a work of God, by which the soul is intincted
and becomes itself the Stone, transmuted and transmuting.
(4) But because it is a Divine Work and because God is
the motive power and all the inward activity, the Stone
is called the Living Spirit of the Elohim, and (5) the
inbreathing of Jehovah, the Divine Power, the Word of

1 History or Macic, Introduction, p. 29. In one of his earlier moods
Eliphas Lévi represents Khunrath as merely affecting Christianity, his Christ
being really the Abraxas, “ the luminous pentagram radiating on the astro-
nomical cross, the incarnation in humanity of the sovereign sun.”—Trans-
ceNDENTAL Macic: irs Doctrine ano Rirvat, p. 348 of my revised and
annotated translation, 1923. I mention this to register a definite denial.
The Christ of Khunrath is the Christ of Nazareth, exalted in the centre of
the sun, to indicate that He is the Sun of Righteousness.

F 65

-- Page 90 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
God in Nature. (6) That Word is made flesh—so to speak
—in the virginal womb of the greater world and (7) is
manifested as Jesus in the virginal womb of Mary, but
also (8) in the soul of man as a light superadded to that
of Nature. Hereby is communicated the knowledge of
God and His Christ.+
In addition to these heads of a thesis I offer for the con-
sideration of my readers three reduced plates out of a total
series of nine very curious engravings on copper, forming
an integral part of the work with which I am concerned.
They represent (1) the Oratory of an Alchemist, the device
belonging to which is laborare est orare, carrying however—
as I think—the sense of its counter-distinction, namely,
that prayer is work. (2) The Gate of Eternal Wisdom,
being that of the knowledge of God; but he who opens
any gate outside himself is working away from the centre
and does not reach his end. (3) The sum and substance
of the whole concern, termed by Eliphas Lévi the Rose of
Light ; but it is an explanation of one symbol in the terms
of another. This symbol signifies the central point of all
wisdom, human and Divine, which point is Christ.2 The
suggestion of the designs as a whole is that the work of the
spiritual alchemist—as shewn by the first plate—belongs to
the path of devotion, notwithstanding the material vessels
with which the kneeling figure is surrounded, but on which
2 It is therefore Christ Mystical—that is to say, realised in the heart.

This is the incarnation which has to take place in each one of us, and here
is the efficient answer to the astronomical Christ of Lévi—crucified pre-
sumably in the heavens at the vernal equinox, as hazarded by Godfrey
Higgins. ‘There are several analogies between the doctrine of Khunrath and
that which passed into expression a few years later in the revelations of his
contemporary, Béhme.

_ ? The so-called Rose of Khunrath is discussed in the next chapter. There
1s no question that the Rose of five petals and the Pentagram are both Christ-
symbols, and both belong to the doctrine of the Rosy Cross at different
stages of development. The pantacle of Khunrath is to be understood in an
interior sense, as concerned with that Christ-Spirit which illuminates the
world which is within.

66

-- Page 91 --
Ay EL AY Gee ee a Hi if ae OV ay Ae
ANN eg Mgnt sais “goer TRE eg aN
Ps BS se a Be Sere Als VUE Zot [aa
F Ae See A hls Ra AION Aye Pure Ae
YOR é% fn SEN Lesh BEN Y A LUG tr LA
BG ENG Sivan gy Ne
‘ag EO EETER cower aoe Sr
Fale as 2295 et 2 Tue gts aM
Peo H wa 3-8 as SPS RS ot Sh ee
= a aOR 9 5 Moe Oe “NEY Ba nig
) PLE, NSN EES Ain SB Ue ie
= BAe eat, Ne ef Petrone?’ % ot NB. : f
ee SO: et ee . aiid £ Wey oh t'SHA oe es a fol
mE Ne) ised tan S AIL Ze Soe 2 a. gs 24
> Paes U9 Zig oF el a A Seed
ES eg ead aie fa =) 2. & 3) Bae Yaad SEISIt A tee
Be ko Cit Come ema aah Bens
ms ite my lA greeary spews 4 ees Fo” Zee
ae EE ehh gd acer ay Sh eer tes
iW: ial Lite, AA Were oo SF 9° bo PR ie
2 4 V2 a a) OF ta tiott Oe cana WD O Per’, o% Pa tsa fet
at Sp PO rat mr MEN eye OP dl I reel! N
acts eee peel 9” Na Sear oN
wD apf vas ofS Sp you Wc Sua) bs !
MYON OM:BS g S85 Layee Na ree et ait no ai bs)
had Fyrck 8 Se, Bt Ae ee ogy '; apo Me ay4
1 AD ZK AEF rece RT ae:
S Wee Pig Sat neriGes os HS Mien TT AAA RR
SO eek eg RO SoA a
a NG ata “Bg ( PN, COR, gs Si
= aR Reece Tench hyd Bt i) ie a Beye
DAS aN RS RE NSS OR I SP OS

-- Page 92 --
Alchemists and Mystics

his back is turned, somewhat significantly. I conclude
that inward work is adumbrated. The suggestion of the
second plate is that the Gate of Wisdom is one which is
opened by prayer, but the latter is not to be understood
in any formal and conventional sense. The gate opens
in the darkness and seems like a journey to the centre,
meaning the inward way and the great path of contempla-
tion—but contemplare est amare. "The third design in-
dicates that Christ is not only the Way but the Truth—
understood centrally—and the very Life itself. ‘This is
Christ Mystical and the Christ of Glory, no longer the
Man of Sorrows and acquainted with infirmity. Yet is
He still in the human likeness and not the Mystic Rose
in the centre of the Macrocosmic Cross. One reason is
that as what is called theologically and officially the scheme
of redemption is an operation within our humanity for
the manifestation of a glory to be revealed, so in the utter-
most attainment humanity is completed, not set aside.
The Christ manifest is not apart from the Lord of Glory,
and the Christ within is ever the Son of Man in us. So
also our great Exemplar in Palestine could not do otherwise
than come to us in human form, or He would have been
never our pattern and prototype. He could not do other-
wise than speak in the clouded symbols of our earthly
language, or He would have brought us no message, except
in the pageant of His life, though this indeed—in its plenary
understanding—is the greatest message of all.

There is no question that in the opinion of Khunrath
the living knowledge of Christ gave that of the Philo-
sophical Stone in the ordinary alchemical understanding

1 The figure is suspended in the sun with arms extended in the cruciform
sign, and about it are written the words: Erat ipse vere Filius Dei. In the
deep allegories of the Rosy Cross this symbol is that of the Christ-nature
manifested in man incarnate. It is the glorified state of humanity, which
has become the Cross. There is no distinction between this Cross and the
Rose in the state of attainment.

67

-- Page 93 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

of this term—in other words, for a medicine of metals
and of physical human nature.' But—as I have said—
he is dealing only with the mystical side of attainment
in his AMPHITHEATRE OF ETERNAL Wispom, though in
such language that the likeness of alchemy shall be
preserved. Many of the old seekers may have sought
to understand him literally, and they went astray
accordingly.

The thesis is veiled under the guise of a new translation
—with commentary—of certain passages extracted from
the Boox or Proverss and the Apocryphal Boox oF
Wispom. ‘The versicles are arranged so that there shall
be one for each day in the year, and each—with its annota-
tion—might well afford food for thought, even at this time,
amidst all the hurry of our ways. The new rendering is
printed side by side with the Vutcate and is in itself,
I think, negligible? The commentary explains that in

1 The Son of God is called the Magnesia of Philosophers, the predestined
and perfect subject of the Philosophical Stone. This lapis philosophorum is
declared to be identical with the Ruach Elohim which brooded over the face
of the waters during the first period of creation. The Ruach Elohim is called
vapor virtutts Det and the internal form of all things. The Perfect Stone
is attained through Christ, and—conversely—the possession of that treasure
gives the knowledge of Christ.

2 For example, the verba prudentie in the Vulgate version of Proverss
i. 3 is translated verba intelligentia, the Hebrew word Binab signifying both
prudence and understanding. The semite equitatis of Proverss iv. 11
become semite rectitudinis. The possession of wisdom in xvi. 16 appears
as “acquisition” in the revision. Scientia is substituted for disciplina in
i. 29. So also in the Vulgate rendering of Wispom vi. g there is the word
cruciatio, which is replaced by ingutsitio in Khunrath’s translation from the
Greek, The Vulgate sacramenta Dei of vi. 24 becomes mysteria simply, and
“emanation” is read “defluxion,” vii. 25. I do not pretend to have
checked the variations throughout, since it is obvious from these instances
that it would serve no purpose. As regards the commentary, this note
might be extended through many pages and yet give a few only among the
curious findings of Khunrath in the consideration of individual verses drawn
from his two sources. The synopsis in my text above will serve the simple
purpose in view. Let us take, however, a single further specimen and one
almost at random. The counsel of PRroverss xxiv. 13 is Comede fili mi, mel,

68

-- Page 94 --
ZR ER eS eS
BESS SAME EES SREB SR Hee ohn ian
Vg NY ER eee EN
Mae oe vie oN oe : ee aN
ERE NN Com) Dias NZ ads Fe
Be AIRE Saas ys NON ASS inl fi RE Cee aN
BSP Be SO IN AIRE NES eS A IRONS SSE EA
Ege fre’ ae P Wiig Oe NG. SS
Oe ye OE ee ES 7 REO BES yee)
frase Me Lee SR ab ei hil” ope x ee Be Pere.
CERO (Galli 90 SSS OR eats | IF § ee ae
ee MLAB r fg Oh | yo aN ae Re a Wy a Sees 4
\ AN 4 Gee Y off Hi ot ~ Se er i EN @ . a 77 OT Bo ,
Lay WN Py Se aA
SO Se eae. WU) Cc 2 A Se hy, me US TBA sae
SS SBR ee 2 * Be SS. % ge S and aD Bai Bi 4
Soe i aa pgs gs A oe Ue ee
a ee eel en ec ining weed
yee ic 1 RN OE a 4 he aca eBid Tae RNase
Te ee ee | ee NR a Ry Re rey | NG
SiSern I ORY ota rate ae SRN oe ANG NEY ee EE WESE
SS Ao ee LNRM OR PLC teal ee ae SSSR PANTS
RE EW NSA Lae ae aie faces bea
aaa ene wie" ww i asain ert 8 So (Rg CERRY
Cee AS Eg AIAN ON SS NINA L 2h ]  ahen |
ge Pee Sabie! AB SEER ee ae iS etn
ee Z, ONS: TTS MIRE ye PG Ny Uae
SS SENAY SIRE LL eaten oy Sa Mee:
SSE SSRN AUS at Sa AN Se RD ee (OI GRE. Bre BARTS Ss
Ses AGRE SS Ra FN
ij Nee i NA GG RAT Ep VBE oo Sar
GZ cl a SF A may ALY Mh FS Poe Sei By ey A
TTR SSRR SoS cous PNY at ae Iai Ment Ze
RUIN IR PP SRR eR we SA, OS ek hit or TY a
eng (FS Ne aeey eee ee
eS eS ee oy
” “y tnt ate SSS 2 TiN Ser
= Sx let cae ae
sa nip oie
Bidiang vbrwusa PO"
THE CHRIST OF GLORY
To face page 68

-- Page 95 --
Alchemists and Mystics

alchemy, as in religion, Man is the Matter of the work,
that subject which is to be purified by Art, the side that is
physical being brought into subjugation by that which is
within and above. God is the Soul which vivifies; the
Holy Spirit is the Bond of Union which leads to the Ever-
lasting Kingdom, and makes possible admission therein—
through the gate of regeneration. The co-operating office
of the alchemist must be performed in the deeps and solitude
of his own spirit—separated from sensible things—as by
a withdrawal into God. The Way of Contemplation and
Divine Colloquy will open the Book sealed with Seven
Seals, which is the Divine Book of the Scriptures, Nature
and the Self. The end is a marriage of Divine Wisdom
with the soul, and therein is that Blessed Vision wherein all
things are beheld.

In addition to the symbolical plates, the scriptural text
and the commentary, there are certain curious tables, and
the significance of one among these is likely to escape the
penetration of all but the most careful reader. It is a
summary of the whole subject, and it testifies that those
who are called to the work must realise, under Divine
leading, that the knowledge (1) of God, (2) of Christ Whom
He has sent, (3) of the greater world, (4) of the self within
each of us and (5) of the Stone sought by the Wise—though
passing under so many names—is one knowledge, which
is attained by virtue of a single gift, faculty or grace
resident within seekers themselves and comparable to
a clear mirror or fountain. Such was one aspect of Ars
magna Alchemie in the year 1598, in the aftermath of the
quia bonum est, et favum dulcissimum gutturi tuo, according to the VuLcaTE, or
in the Aurnorisep Version : “ My son, eat thou honey, because it is good ;
and the honeycomb, which is sweet to thy taste.” The commentary explains
that honey signifies the Doctrine of Eternal Wisdom, or the Bread of Life
and that when eaten by the mouth of the purified heart it gives back life
to those who have been dead in sin and will redeem from that death which
is eternal.

69

-- Page 96 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
Mititia Crucirera Evancezica, and on the threshold of
the Rosicrucian Mystery.t

As neither Jacob Béhme nor Khunrath cast light on the
historical origin of the Rosy Cross, or give evidence of
connection therewith, we must proceed on our way with
caution and examine some further suggestions. It has
been customary to speak of Gottfrid Arnold’s monograph
on the Rosicrucians in his Hisrory oF THE CHURCH AND
or Heretics? in terms of high praise, and it is certainly
creditable for the period.’ I refer to it, however, for two

1 Tt may be added at this point that the Supreme Council of the Ancient
and Accepted Rite of Freemasonry had somewhere once among its valuable
MSS. at the headquarters in London a work entitled: Tursaurus THEsau-
RORUM A FRaTERNITATE Rose er AuRE Crucis TEsTAMENTO CoNnsIGNATUS
ET IN ARCAM Fa@pERIs REPOSITUS SUZ SCHOLZ ALUMNIS ET ELECTIS FRATRIBUS
anno MDLXXX. See p. 69 of the Catalogue printed under the editorship
of Mr, Edward Armitage, where it is described as a German MS. “ with
emblematic coloured drawings.” It was not to be found when I made in-
quiries concerning it, and in its absence I can only infer that it bears a false
date, which may be of course a transcriber’s error. There is no question
that the descriptive title of Golden and Rosy Cross is not heard of till the
early eighteenth century, while the manifest activities of the society so
denominated belong, as we shall see, to the year 1777 and subsequently.
The probable true date is therefore 1780.

® Unrarreuscne Kircuen unp Kerzer-Historrr, 4 vols. folio. Frank-
furt-am-Mayn, 1700-15. The monograph in question will be found in
Vol. II, Book XVII, cap. 18, ic. Von DENEN RosENCREUTZEN, pp. 613-28.
See also Vol. IV, sect. III, No. XI, pp. 889, goo; and 1b7d., p. 1035.

3 Perhaps, after all, it belongs to the same category as the oft quoted or
rather mentioned reference of J. L. von Mosheim, which occurs in his
Instrrures oF Eccuzstasticaz History, Book IV, s.v. SEVENTEENTH CENTURY,
Sect, I. This contrasts very appositely the Peripatetics or followers of
Aristotle—more especially his modern expositors—with the Fire-Philosophers
or Chemists, who “ roamed over nearly every country of Europe,” assuming
the “ obscure and deceptive title of Rosicrucian Brethren.” Unfortunately,
the last clause is of itself sufficient to indicate that the reference is singularly
uncritical, considering the name of Mosheim. It is he, furthermore, who is
responsible for stating that Béhme was one of the Rosicrucian leaders, adding
that the personalities of the first group were succeeded by J. B. van Helmont,
ris son Franciscus Mercurius, by C. Knorr von Rosenroth, Quirin Kuhlmann,

pared Noll, Julius Sperber and numerous others. With the sole exception

° perber, who belongs to the informal debating society which filled

ermany with printed polemics on the claims of the Rosy Cross, there is
7O

-- Page 97 --
Alchemists and Mystics

reasons only: (1) Because Arnold suggests that Valentin
Weigel may have founded the Rosy Cross ; and (2) because
he mentions—on the authority of a certain Breklingius +
—that Agidius Gutmann was a member. There is not the
least evidence in favour of either ascription. Weigel was
a Lutheran mystic of his period, who—like Jacob BOhme—
offered too strong meat for the consumption of his co-
religionists, and his writings were laid under an interdict
in Saxony, about 1624. He was born in 1533 and died
in 1588, or many years before the Rosy Cross had
been heard of—even as a symbol. He is said to have
illustrated his extravagance by maintaining that Jesus
Christ came down from heaven ready clothed in flesh and
blood.

The day of Luther and Melancthon was not a day of
light, much less of wisdom in the spirit, so it came about
that Weigel had his followers, some of whom saw to the
publication of his works, while others proclaimed his coming
as an advent of Christ. It is said that they were persecuted
by the alternative class of maniacs who held to the Bible
only, on condition that it was their exclusive province to
affirm its meanings. There seems little to distinguish
Weigelian theosophy from that of Naomerria—so
far as we can judge concerning it or concerning the
Mititia Crucirera Evanceuica. It has been regarded
as a kind of marriage between Dionysian mysticism
and Paracelsian reveries belonging to occult science. As
such there seems no inseparable reason why Weigel
should not have been founder and Grand Master ad
again no particle of evidence. But for Mosheim, as for so many, every
alchemist, Kabalist and exponent of Magia was identified with the Brother-

1 Friedrich Breckling wrote Recina Pecunra, 1663; Bistta Paurerum,
1664; and Lreerras er Poresras Ecctestm Vinpicata, published in the
same year. It will be seen therefore that he is a deponent long after the
alleged event.

71

-- Page 98 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
vitam of the Rosicrucian Order, except that he was too
early.?

We are in much the same position with regard to gidius
Gutmann, who isa little earlier in the chronology of German
mysticism, a Suabian who was born at Augsburg in 1490 and
died four years earlier than Weigel in 1584. His sole but
sufficient memorial is Revetations oF Divine Majesty,
being a theosophical eduction of the inward sense of
Genesis. According to R. A Vaughan, he “ mingled, in
hopeless confusion, religious doctrine and alchemic process,
physics and scripture, tradition, vision, fancy, fact.” I do
not offer this citation as one who is satisfied with the verdict,
because Gutmann has also strange, real lights scattered
through his vast text, and there is no need to say that
Vaughan—who knew the mystics only on their outer side
—was in no wise qualified to find a guide therein. It
enables us to see, however, the metaphysical personality
with which we are dealing in Gutmann. He connects with
alchemy on the spiritual side of its symbols, and when
Arnold calls him a Rosicrucian it is manifestly incorrect

1 T do not wish it to be inferred that Weigel is in any sense beneath con-
tempt. On the contrary, he is a figure of some importance in the theosophy
of his period and comparable as such to Gutmann. It is idle to judge these
people on the side of their extravagance only. We need to know more about
them, and that at first hand, in order to understand German theosophy and
Hermetism at the end of the sixteenth century, and in order to appreciate
the not unfruitful fact that the Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross, which
brought all these enthusiasms and also their spiritual lights into a kind of
informal centre, was by no means merely a school of Paracelsus, merely an

occult cabal or an association claiming to possess the secret of transmuting
metals. The tracts of Valentine Weigel are: (1) Cuurcy or HospPIrat ;
(2) Master-Tract on Tranquituiry; (3) A Goupen Srvuus, leading to
the Knowledge of all things without Error ; (4) Diatocues on CHRISTIANITY 5
(5) Tue Universan Concern; (6) A Snort Way ro UnpersTanp ALL
Tunes; (7) A Lirrre Book or rue Lire or Curis; (8) A SHort TREATISE
on Prayer. He is treated somewhat tenderly by Jacob Béhme, in his
Second Epistle, more especially on the subject of St. Mary as an Eternal
Virgin and on the New Birth. See Episries or Jacos Beumen, English
Translation, 1649.

72

-- Page 99 --
Alchemists and Mystics

in the corporate sense, though otherwise Gutmann repre-
sents the set of notions, the mental feelings and attitude
to which the Order at a later period gave a more definite
expression. In other words, he was a precursor but not
a member, and—as I have mentioned elsewhere—his
Revetations! became a sort of Rosicrucian textbook, an in-
spiring spirit, much as L. C. de Saint-Martin’s Des Erreurs
ET DE LA Vérité was like a gospel for the theosophical side
of High-Grade Masonry towards the end of the eighteenth
century. The Imitario of St. Thomas 4 Kempis and the
anonymous T'HEoLocia GerManica were other textbooks.
I do not doubt that Tue CLoup or Unxnow1ne would have
been of no less repute in the Order, had it been possible
for an unprinted English text to have been known among
them. The Rosicrucian maxim—Summa Scientia nihil scire
—indicates that it would have been accepted in its true and
vital spirit. I conclude that Weigel, Gutmann and the
Rosy Cross were fashioned in one likeness and carried the
same seals.

‘There are other claimants by proxy—meaning by their
sponsors in speculation—but they will not detain us long.
To his own satisfaction—and it would appear that he stood
by himself therein—the Abbé Lefranc presented Faustus
Socinus to an unbelieving world as the veritable founder of
Emblematic Freemasonry, and having gone so far he turned
an inquisitive eye on the field of possibilities opened by the
Rosy Cross. He was not long in discovering that the same
mouthpiece of heresy had also spoken great things of the

1 According to Lenglet du Fresnoy, the ReveLations appeared at
Hanover in 1609, but the copy in the British Museum is dated from the
same place in 1619. As there is no trace otherwise of a second edition till
that of Amsterdam and Frankfurt in 1675, I conclude that the French
bibliographer erred or that his printer blundered. The full title is Orren-
BARUNG GérTLicHeR MayesTat, DARINNEN ANGEZEIGT Wirp, wie GOTT DER
HERR ANFANGLICH SICH ALLEN SEINEN GESSCHOPFEN, MIT WoRTEN UND
WERCKEN GROFFENBARET, etc. Edited by M. B. M. F.C. I. 2 vols. 4to.
Buchladen, Hanover, 1619.

73

-- Page 100 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
occult and mystical Order, which had no other author and
head. This was in the middle years of the eighteenth
century. It signified little to his purpose that Socinus had
carried his findings in doctrine beyond the gates of death
many years before Rosicrucianism began to be a name in
Europe.1 The virus of such inventions has often a counter-
nostrum provided by inventions of an opposite kind; and
we have therefore in this case the allegation that John
Tauler—who is connected otherwise with the Brethren
of the Common Life—was no stranger to the mystical
concerns of the Rosy Cross and had a first hand therein.
Such a myth being transparently absurd, the responsi-
bility was shifted to an obscure namesake—possibly to the
concealed personality behind THe FoLLowinc or THE Poor
Lirt or Curist, which has been passed as the work of
Tauler. Finally, there is Joachim Junge, who was born
at Lubeck in 1587 and died in 1657 at Hamburg. When the
Fama was printed he was therefore some twenty-seven years
of age. In 1619 he is said to have planned a society
for the advancement of natural science, to have sub-
stituted experiment for antiquated theories and to have
been ranked by Leibnitz as the equal of Copernicus and
Galileo. This is the sole colour for his alleged connection
as founder with the Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross. He
was a natural philosopher, geometrician and scientific
botanist. His one link with occultism is that he was at

1 Asa fact, he makes it part of his evidence, because Socinus died in 1604,
and this—according to Lefranc—was the epoch of the Rosy Cross, meaning
presumably that it is the hypothetical date when the 120 years had expired
since the alleged death of F..R..C.. in 1484. Lefranc did not know that
it is also the date of Naometria.

2 M. Sédir is mistaken when he says that Junge was thirteen only “at the
epoch of the apparition of the Fama.” He is still more seriously in error
when he follows Hefer respecting the writings of Tauler. According to this
extraordinary biographer, the fictitious treatises ascribed to the disciple of
Rulman Merswin are his authentic works and the genuine writings are
forgeries. I prefer Surius to Hoefer.

74

-- Page 101 --
Alchemists and Mystics
issue with the Peripatetics of his day, preferring experience
to scholastic debate.

In the year 1614, when the spirit of the new age gave
up the first Rosicrucian documents, it produced also
Michael Maier, the greatest of the literary alchemists at
this or perhaps any period. I shall deal with him at length
later on. Between the date just mentioned and the publica-
tion of AMPHITHEATRUM in 1608 there intervened two
other alchemical writers and editors, to whom a false
importance has been attributed in connection with Rosi-
crucian problems. We have to thank that patient but
undiscriminating collector Solomon Semler for'providing
materials to some zanies of historical research by his
reference to alleged travels and adventures of Nicolas
Barnaud in search of Hermetic philosophers and to the
activities of that impassioned idolater of Paracelsus who
called himself Benedictus Figulus—a name which I have
mentioned previously. ‘They are both of moment to our
subject, as representing the kind of occult atmosphere in
which the Rosicrucian movement grew up. Barnaud
was of Crest in Dauphiny—or more especially in the de-
partment of Dréme, according to present allocations.
The dates of his birth and death are alike unknown, but
he is said by Semler to have been travelling on the quest
of Philosophers or Hermetic Masters in and about the year
1591, and to have had the intention of incorporating them
into some kind of society. He is said also—in this year,
or alternatively in 1601—to have issued an open letter to
all French alchemists, exhorting the alleged Masters to
employ their art in the interests of the Church of Christ
and Prince Henry of Nassau. What actually happened

1 Semler dwells upon the fact that “about this time and onwards ?—
namely, 1600—various German princes became “ lovers of secret chemistry,”
In addition to the Emperor himself he cites Ernest, Electoral Prince of
Cologne; Duke Frederic of Wiirtemberg; Julius of Brunswick; the
Landgrave Maurice of Hesse. Conradus Schuler, a Hermetic writer and
collector, bears similar testimony.

75

-- Page 102 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

was that in 1601 he issued a Lerrer on Occutt Puitosopny,
which was addressed by a certain father to his spiritual heir
or son. Whether he was the father in question or merely
an editor of the document remains doubtful? He is
known more especially as an editor—so far as his
alchemical connections are concerned—and he brought
some rare texts to light, e.g. the Quaprica AURIFERA,
1613, including tracts of George Ripley; but he wrote
also on his own part an ExucipaTion oF THE SECRET
oF PuritosopHers, while if bibliographers apart from
occultism are to be trusted in their allocations he was the
author of two very different works under the name of
Nicolas de Montaud.? Notwithstanding his alleged but
entirely mythical Epistle to the Masters for their enlist-
ment in the service of the Church he was—in this case—
on the side of drastic reform, recommending among other
things the secularisation and marriage of the clergy. It
is possibly for such reason that he has been even accredited
with the authorship of THe Turee Impostors, that other
mythical work which no one has read and no one has seen,
but which is said to have been of peculiar infamy.

The authority for the travels of Barnaud—outside Semler

1 De Occutta Puinosoruia, Episrora Cuyuspem Parris ap Fizium, 2
Nicotao Barnaupo Medico a Crista Arnandt Delphinate Gallo, nunc primum
in lucem edita in gratiam omnium philosophorum, maxima vero Batavorum—
that is to say, Leyden, being the place of its publication in 1601.

2 There is perhaps no substantial ground for affirming that he was
author rather than editor, except the cloud of false-seeming which sur-
rounded the publication of documents supposed to be antique all about the
period in question.

3 The works in question are: (1) Casiner pu Ror pz France and (2) Le
Mrrorr prs Francais. Both appeared in 1582, the prefaces being dated
October and November of the previous year. The Caniner was dedicated
to Henri III and the Mrrorr to the “ reigning Queen.” The first deals more
especially with the corruption of the ecclesiastical hierarchy and the second
with the miseries and burdens of the French people. It is perhaps on his
alleged authorship of these revolutionary works that Barnaud is described
as belonging to the reformed religion.

76

-- Page 103 --
Alchemists and Mystics
—in search of philosophers and the secrets of the Magnum
Opus is said to be Ecuo Fratsrnitatis R.. C... which ap-
peared in 1615.1 ‘There is nothing improbable in the story ;
the amateurs of the Hermetic Art were indefatigable in
activities of this kind, and the wanderings of Bernard Trevi-
san in the fifteenth century are a memorial at large of the
great zeal in quest. But Barnaud went, as we have seen,
on a general research of Masters and not of Rosicrucian
adepts, as mendacious witnesses have testified, while the
Epistre of 1601 is an altogether different document to
that which has been described: it is not written to al-
chemists at large, nor does it enlist anyone in the service
of Church or State.2 It opens with a promise addressed
to a Son of the Doctrine on the part of his mystical father
—that he will reveal to him the secret of all secrets, the
most holy and excellent treasure, on the sole condition that
he will hand it on to no one. The revelation of the secret
opens in characteristic terms as follows: “Take in the
Name of Christ our Blessed Stone, our Honourable Stone,
Glorious and Incombustible Stone, that Stone which
is hidden by all Philosophers and described only in parables :
This Stone is most excellent Roman Vitriol.? Here is the
Stone, my dearest Son, which all philosophers have con-
cealed.”4 There is absolutely no reference to the Rosi-

1 Ecno per von Gott-HocuERLevcuTeren Frarernirer prs... Rosen
Creutzis. Dantzic, 1615. It included a German version of the Conrzss1o
Fraternitatis R.C,, according to Lenglet du Fresnoy, but his reference is to
a second edition, published in the following year. The statement is untrue
in respect of both editions, and there is also no allusion to Barnaud.

2 In the editor’s preface, which of course is addressed generally to
presumed readers, i.e. students of alchemy, there is a recommendation of
this kind respecting (1) the Prince of Nassau and (2) the Duke Maurice.

3 Rulandus gives Green Atrament and Vitriolum Album as alternative
names, Alchemically, Metallic Vitriols are said to be Salts of Metals.

4 Compare TRacTatutus Cuemicus and the process beginning : Filat mea
res, vel substantia una ex duobus. There is also the PaiLosopHicum Pocutum
of Nicolas Barnaud, which is Pocuzum Amaritupinis. The separate
letters of these two words form the following sentence: Amore Mulieris

77

-- Page 104 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
crucians, and the extant remains of Barnaud will be searched
to no purpose concerning them.t We are therefore in
a position to estimate Kieswetter’s talent for scandalous
invention when on the authority of his supposititious manu-
scripts he affirms (1) That in the year 1601 Barnaud printed
a Latin letter addressed to all Rosicrucians in France ;
(2) that he had therefore entered into close relation
with the Order and was probably its Imperator; and (3)
that his perambulation of Germany some ten years
previously was undertaken in search of “the Hermetic
Masters of the Rosy Cross.’”?

I suppose that Benedictus Figulus, as we know him by
his memorials, was almost as the poles asunder from Nicolas
Barnaud, the only link of connection between them being
that they were both alchemists and both editors of curious
Ardens Ruffus ‘Fuvenis Transfigitur Venas Disrumpit Irascttur Nigrescit
Inalbatur Sanguinem Postremo Ostendit Clarum Unctuosum Lapidem Uni-
versalem Medicinorum. This is probably a device of Barnaud, introducing
his editorial work. .

1 In addition to the Episrora ... Parris ap Fiurum, the extant
alchemical writings and compilations of Barnaud are: (1) Brevis E-uctpatio
Arcani Puitosopuorum. Leyden, 1599. I have mentioned this in the text
above. (2) Trica Cuemica, seu De Lapide Philosophorum Tractatus Tres
Leyden, 1600. (3) Quaprica Aurirera. Leyden, 1599, being tracts by various
authors. (4) Aurica Cuemicus, td est, Tractatalus Chemicus, Theosophie
Palmarium Dictus Anonymi cujusdam Philosopht antiqui .. . nune primum
editus, 1601. It contains fifty-eight propositions, mostly drawn from the
Toursa PuitosopHorum, and descants thereon.

2 After notifying his astonishment that Rudolph II was never a member
of the Order, Kieswetter proceeds to class Gerhard Doon and Thaddeus von
Hayeck—as well as Michael Maier—among undoubted Brethren of the
Rosy Cross, his evidence being of course wanting. Compare Hermann
Fictuld: Azorx et Icnts, to which is appended Aureum Vetus. Leipzig,
1748, p. 147, where it it said that after the death of Duke Charles of
Burgundy, the possessors of the Great Secret—presumably like Doon and von
Hayeck—retired with their exalted science, and a new Order was founded
under the name of the Rose-Cross of Gold. But the denomination Rosy and
Golden Cross belongs more especially to the eighteenth, not the seventeenth,
century and appears to have represented two branches of the Order, which
were at work together, as we shall see. We shall find, however, that Mada-
thanus mentions the Golden Cross in 1621.

78

-- Page 105 --
Alchemists and Mystics

literary remains belonging to the Hermetic tradition.
That either of them had put their hands to the practice,
so-called, in the physical sense, I take leave to doubt, and
in any case there is no evidence before us to suggest that
they had. Barnaud was on the blind work in metals and
wrote the common stuff of his period in that interest.
Figulus was characterised by a devotional mind which
lifted his occult wares above the dull and unintelligible
groove of merely material dealings. Paracelsus was his
great master; but for him—in his untutored zeal—all the
literary vestiges which came into his hands shewed great
lights, and he cherished superfervid hopes that he would
reach the end of philosophy.1. He also made journeys,
seeking the wisdom of adepts and his beloved Sons of the
Doctrine. According to his own description, he was poet,
theologian, theosopher, philosopher, and even eremite, but
not a doctor in alchemy or a student of that art. He was—
I think—on a heavenly quest, “ by means of the grace of
God.” He has been placed in the witness-box on the
side of Rosicrucian antiquities by people who never in
their lives have taken the pains to consult his various texts,
but have depended on vague and antiquated reports which
they have shaped and coloured to their liking. He is said
to have mentioned that there was an association of phy-
siclans and alchemists in the fourteenth century, whose
object was to discover the Philosopher’s Stone. There is
nothing more likely and nothing follows therefrom, unless
it is the indubitable fact of their failure, which might serve
as an object lesson. But Figulus is said further to have
affirmed that this obscure body of research was merged

1 Thus—in a Pro.ocurory anp Depicarory Spzxcu, prefixed to the
Go.tpen anp Buizssep Casket—we find him guaranteeing to reward those
who would assist him in the recovery of Paracelsian MSS. with “a grateful
compensation when we (D.V.) shortly reach our goal in philosophy and
medicine.”

79

-- Page 106 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

in the Rosicrucian Order about 1607.1 The statement is
invention as usual; the Paracelsian alchemist never bore
testimony to the Order in any shape whatsoever, nor did he
ever write anything which certifies in a cogent and convincing
manner to the existence of corporate, occult or mystical
association during his own period or before it. I have taken
all the medieval centuries as my province and all the
Renaissance period in the hope of getting back this subject
behind the Lutheran Reformation or behind, as an irre-
ducible minimum, the unspeakable Andrean epoch of
Wirtemberg theology, and the materials are before my
readers. It does not leave one stone standing on another
of the house fantastic built up in clouds of pretence by
the makers of false myths, the custodians of forged docu-
ments and those who pretend that one of their “ ancestors ”
was once an Imperator of the Order. J could have wished
that they bore true testimony, for then I should have
reached my term.

Benedictus Figulus belonged to the Catholic school of
alchemy, and herein—as in other matters—he differed
widely from the College of Initiation which was typified
by the Rosy Cross. He has left us indeed in one of his

1 Mr. C. F. Gould has been misled by this story and reproduces it in his
Concise History or Freemasonry, giving no authority. See p. 73 of the
work mentioned. He says also that—according to Figulus—there was one
secret society which had existed for over two thousand years. Gould had
no axe to grind and was incapable of inventing evidence, but he had only a
passing acquaintance with Rosicrucian history and took the word of others.
Professor Ferguson has drawn attention to a passage in Semler which discovers
Rosicrucian ideas in the preface to the collection of Figulus published
at Frankfort-on-the-Main in 1608 under the title of THEsaurINELLA
Oxympica Aurea Tripartita, According to Heckethorn, it has allusions to
an alchemical society and this has been expanded, of course, into a Rosi-
crucian reference. The prefatory matter of THESAURINELLA is comprised in a
Dedicatory Epistle and an Address ad lectorem philochemicum. There is no
such allusion in either. We hear of Elias the Artist, of veritas bujus artis,
of the German Monarch Aureolus Theophrastus Paracelsus, of antecessores,
Sons of the Doctrine, etc., but of Rosicrucians nothing and nothing of
Hermetic Societies.

80

-- Page 107 --
Alchemists and Mystics

collections a most curious example of an Hermetic Mass,
containing variations in the Introits, Collects, Antiphons
and other parts of the Orpinary: they have become
Invocations for the Gift of Divine Light on the Secret
of Philosophy. Figulus passes therefore, like Nicolas
Barnaud, into the background, though he is left in a better
position, as one who deserves by his dedications to be called
a precursor of the Rosy Cross when it is taken at its best
and highest—in the aspect, for example, presented by
Robert Fludd, as we shall see later on. Barnaud, on the
other hand, does not connect with the subject except in
an accidental manner, as an alchemist on the material side
and then only as speculative rather than practical, and chiefly
as an editor of texts.

The general conclusion of Semler is that prior to 1597
there was a society of learned persons drawn from all
classes, the members of which were engaged in the produc-
tion of works on alchemy, theosophy and other subjects
included, under the broad denomination of Magia. As
he gives no reason to suppose that they were incorporated,
his research tends simply to shew that like-minded people
drew naturally together, went in search of one another
and may, to some extent, have worked in common. The
conclusion of M Sédir! is that there was no Rosicrucian
Fraternity before 1600 or 1603, though Hermetic Fraterni-
ties had existed previously in several countries. But on
the last count of his conclusion he can indicate only the
supposed Parliamentum Hermeticum of Raymund Lully
and his Rex Physicorum, which has—I think—been dis-
posed of finally in my first chapter.

There are two last points and then we shall have finished
the research in all its directions until the printed documents
of the Rosicrucian Order come for consideration before
us. As against all the rumours, speculations and mendacious

1 Hist. pes Rose-Crorx, pp. 42, 43.
G 81

-- Page 108 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
inventions, it looks for one moment as if we should meet
with a genuine and unchallengeable reference to the Rosy
Cross—in the irrecusable plainness of print—in the year
1610. It has been said that Francis Allary, described as
a visionary, was the author of a book published in that year
under the title of BrotHer anp Count Bompastes, KNIGHT
oF THE Rose-Crorx, NepHew or Paracetsus. It has the
aspect of a chap-book or one of those contributions to the
literature of colportage which are first cousins in alchemy
to the Grimoires of Black Magic; but as such it would
be only the more remarkable if it should embody an allusion
to the Rosy Cross, some four years before the Order began
to be heard of by its own printed documents. It has been
used accordingly to indicate the existence of a peculiarly
early memorial. It is interesting also and even important
after another manner, because the Fama FraTerniratis
tells us of Fratres R.. C -. but not of a chivalry under that
title. In the year 1616 we hear of the Founder of the
Fraternity being made under very peculiar circumstances
an Eques Auret Lapidis, but the denomination of Chevalier
de la Rose-Croix is a Masonic dignity which did not come
into use until after 1750. On examination, however, we
are confronted by another blunder, if indeed it is not to
be characterised by a rougher term. In the year 1610
there appeared, presumably at Paris, a slender volume,
containing a Propuscy by the said Count Bombast, but
it is anonymous and has no Rosicrucian reference in the
title, which reads as follows: La PropHtrie pE ce GRAND
Bompast [sic] fidellement annoncée par le Trompette Fran gots
dés Pannée 1609. Sur la mort de Henry Le Grand, et sur le
Régne de Louis traisiéme, Rot de France et de Navarre a present
regnant... S.J, 1610, The publication forms therefore
no part of our concern, but in the year 1701 there was
issued PropHitie pu Comte Bompast, Chevalier de la
Rose-Croix, nevue de TuHtoruraste Paracetse, publiée en

82

-- Page 109 --
Alchemists and Mystics

Pannée 1609, sur la naissance miraculeuse de Louis LEGRAND,
les circonstances de sa minorité, Pextirpation de la Heresie,
Punion de VEspagne a la Maison de Bourbon... . Ex-
pliquée et presentée au Roy par Francois Avary, Docteur
en Médicine. A Panis, 1701. It follows that part of the
title descriptive of the later publication has been trans-
ferred to the former in order to advance the claim and
that an item of nomenclature which would have been
historically of considerable consequence in 1610 is of no
moment whatever in 1701, so far as Rosicrucian history is
concerned. The unknown Dr. Alary most likely drew on
his imagination for the decorative title which is conferred
on the mythical nephew of Paracelsus; but CHEVALIER
DE LA Rose-Cro1x, which is so familiar in High Grade
Masonry after 1754, is not a little curious in 1701, from
a Masonic standpoint, when it is moderately certain that
there were not even three Masonic Degrees. The new
edition of the Propuecy is not a reprint of the first but
reproduces its gist in the form of extracts, with comment-
aries thereupon. It has a dedication to the King and a pre-
face, which seems to regard Le TRoMPETTE Frangals (sic) of
the 1610 title as signifying the original author.

There is finally the so-called Diary of Hosea Lux and
its alleged Rosicrucian pictures, the quest of which I fol-
lowed, owing to a talismanic description by C. W. King.t
He reports (1) that the unique manuscript was written
between the years 1568 and 1612; (z) that it exhibits
“ the whole list ” of existing Masonic Signs, but employed
for Rosicrucian purposes. ‘The “signs” enumerated by
King are: (1) A bearded head placed upon a box on which
are inscribed the letters X.P.S. (2) The same on a box
inscribed with the Seal of Solomon. (3) The same, over
an Ark of the Covenant. (4) The Pillars J. and B. (5)
A human figure with uplifted hands, but having, instead

1 THe GNOSTICs AND THEIR Rematns, second edition, pp. 396, 397.
83

-- Page 110 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

of a face, the Seal of Solomon enclosing a retort. (6)
A naked boy extended on a wheel. (7) An egg containing
a circle, whence issue rays of light. Such are the designs
which King characterises as originally Rosicrucian emblems,
but “ now embalmed in the repertory of the Freemasons.”
My own examination of the Diary, which is a minute,
or midget volume, for many years in the collection of Mr.
J. E. Hodgkin and now in that of his son, bears out neither
dream, as might be expected from the particulars here
enumerated. It is simply an alchemical manuscript, full
of very curious designs in addition to those tabulated, but
none of them are Rosicrucian in character, nor are any
Masonic, except in rare cases belonging to universal sym-
bolism. We know that pillars are everywhere, and so is
the six-pointed star.

The sole conclusion which evidence permits us to draw
from the inquiries pursued in this chapter is that Simon
Studion and the reveries of Naometrra are the fons et
ortgo of the Rosicrucian claim and that its theosophical
doctrine was held in common by many theosophists at
the end of the sixteenth century, including zealots and
enthusiasts. It is possible, however, to approach the subject
of the symbolism from another and independent point of
departure.

-- Page 111 --
CHAPTER IV
SYMBOLISM OF THE ROSE AND CROSS

Ir is necessary to make a sharp distinction in opening the
consideration to which this chapter is dedicated because
of the uncritical methods which have been followed by
several writers. They have met with certain vestiges of
symbolism and tradition concerning (1) the Rose and (2)
Cross in their natural separation from each other and have
then sought to infer that the Rosicrucian emblem of Rose
and Cross united is extremely old. Nothing of the kind
follows in any rational sense of quest. I propose on my own
part to look at the whole subject, critically and historically,
under four heads, being (1) the story of the Rose in sym-
bolism, so far as this symbolism connects with Rosicrucian
tradition ; (2) the Cross, under similar reserves; (3) the Rosi-
crucian symbol, as described and explained in Rosicrucian
official publications and in works depending therefrom ; (4)
the antiquity of this symbol, with special reference to the
question whether it was borrowed or devised by those who
first used it in connection with the Rosy Cross of history.

We are concerned therefore with the Rose in the first
place, and as I am dealing with a Christian Order, there is
no occasion to dwell—except in summary form—upon its
story in non-Christian symbolism, and above all in Pagan
myth. I note therefore only: (1) That the Rose belonged
as much to Jacchus as to Aphrodite.t (2) That, however,

1 Respecting the silence of which the Rose was a symbol, compare the
reticence and modesty by which the Perfect Mysteries of Love are environed
and the stillness of that ecstacy implied by the higher understanding of
Tacchic Mysteries.

85

-- Page 112 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
it was sacred especially to Venus, considered as the goddess
of love. (3) That it was a palmary symbol in the Thracian
cultus of Sabasius. (4) That one of the principal festivals
of the Thracian Dionysiacs under the Roman dominion
was called Rosalia. (5) That the famous Rose-Garden of
Midas, the King of the Phrygians, contained roses of sixty
petals. (6) That it was at once an erotic plant and a safe-
guard against intoxication. (7) That it was also a funerary
symbol. (8) That the Brahminical Garden of Heaven con-
tains a Silver Rose, but the authenticity of this story might
prove doubtful.t (9g) That the Rose in ancient Egypt is
said to have been a symbol of regeneration, but I have not
found adequate authority for this statement.?. (10) That
the Mexican Eve sinned by gathering Roses.3 (11) That
when the angel of the Lord announced to the Mexican Eve
respecting a conception to come, he placed a Rose in her
hand ; but this bears all the marks of an imitative or spurious
legend. (12) That the world-wide repute of the Rose
as a symbol of silence originated in a classical story that
it was consecrated by Cupid to Harpocrates as a bribe not
to betray the multitudinous adventures of his mother
Venus; but this is a vulgarian explanation.’ (13) That
it does not account for the pre-Christian German custom
of the Rose-emblem in the ceiling of banqueting halls—
as a reminder that whatever was said beneath it must not

2 Tt is quoted at length in my Reat History or THE Rostcrucrans

It.
P * The authority—for better, for worse—is Mr. W. S. Hunter, of the
Societas Rosicruciana in Scotia. He wrote on the Rose and its symbolism in
the Transactions of the Soc. Ros. in Anglia for 1898-9.
#2 * See Mexican Anriqurtiss, Vol. VI, p. 120 e¢ ante.
gs * Lbid., p. 177.

5 The Rose—both red and white—was sacred to Harpocrates. See
Nimrod: Atcuymus, ie, Hisrory anp Fastz, Vol. IV, p- 557. The Hon.
Auberon Herbert, who wrote under this name, speaks of red and white roses
blossoming in the garden of Knights Templar, but it appears to be reverie.
Whatsoever was dedicated to Harpocrates was sacred also to silence, as there
is no need to say.

-- Page 113 --
Symbolism of the Rose and Cross

be repeated elsewhere.1 (14) That the white Rose was
especially sacred to silence. (15) That the colour of the
red Rose was derived from the blood of Adonis, when
wounded by the wild boar, or alternatively from that of
Venus, who in her haste to assist Adonis was pierced in
the foot by the thorn of a white Rose, which sprinkled the
flower with her blood, and it has been incarnadined ever
since. (16) That otherwise the white Rose was made red
by Cupid upsetting a cup of nectar in the course of his
dancing before the gods.

It will be seen that in this enumeration we have been
dealing, for the most part, with varieties of legend and
frivolities of cheap symbolism. If we turn now to the
canonical Scriptures of Israel we find only two references,
of which one is apart from symbolism.? There is the
familiar promise that “the desert shall blossom as the
Rose” ® and there is the eloquent testimony of the Sonc
oF Sotomon, which is translated in the Authorised Version :
“T am the Rose of Sharon.” 4 We are carried thereby
into the realm of Christian symbolism, and it may be noted
in the first place that the Hebrew text yw nbyan un is
rendered by the Vuucate Ego flos campi, while it appears
to be an open question in the mind of Catholic commen-
tators ® whether the words are spoken by the Lover or

, I mean that the German allocation does not connote a classical origin.
As regards silence, compare the three rosettes on a Master Mason’s apron and
their alleged reference to Fidelity, Secrecy and Silence.

® That it to say, the reference is by way of comparison and belongs to
poetic imagery.

9 Isatan xxxv, 1. Observe, however, the Vulgate rendering: Letabitur
deserta et invia, et exsultabit solitudo, et florebit quasi lilium—shall blossom as
the Lily, instead of as the Rose.

a © Loc, cit., Cap. II, 1.

ij ° Petrus de Mora refers the emblem to both in his allusion to three

mystical roses: Prima rosa est chorus martyrum ; secunda, Virgo Virginum ;

tertia, Mediator Dei et hominum. The first is red, the second is white, the

third is red and white. Compare St. Bernard in his Szrmo pr Beata Maria.

Maria rosa fuit candida per virginitatem, rubicunda per charitatem ; candida,
87

-- Page 114 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
Beloved of the poem : in the mystical sense, they have been
applied therefore indifferently to Christ and the Blessed
Virgin. The latter allocation is illogical under any circum-
stances, as however spiritually understood the persone of the
Sonc or Sotomon are in the relation of Bridegroom and
Bride. It makes void also the arbitrary but far-prevailing
interpretation of the poem as unfolding in earthly imagery
the union between Christ and His Church. ‘The fact remains,
notwithstanding, that we have on the one hand the sym-
bolical position given in the Grade of Rose-Croix, that Christ
is the Rose of Sharon and was foretold in the Sonc oF
SoLomon under this mystical title, while on the other we
have a broad general connection instituted between the
Rose and Mary.1. The Rose of Jericho has been called St.
Mary’s Rose and tradition affirms that when Joseph and
Mary were taking their flight into Egypt one of these
flowers sprang up to mark every spot where they rested.?
In medizval times it was called Rosa Mariz, while Marien
carne; rubicunda, mente; candida, virtutem sectando; rubicunda, vitia
calcando ; candida, affectum purificando ; rubicunda, actum carnalem morti-
Sicando ; candida, Deum diligendo ; rubicunda, proximo compatiendo.

1 There is a remarkable symbolism concerning Christ and His Divine
Nature in the Golden Rose, which is said to be blessed and carried by the
Pope on the Fourth Sunday in Lent, called Mid-Lent Sunday, otherwise
Letare Hierusalem and Dominica de Rosa. See Durandus: RatTIoNaLe
Divinorum Orriciorum, p. 207. Venice, 1609. This is quoted by Soane
in New Currosrries or Lirerarurg, I, pp. 120,121. But there is evidently a
mistake, for there is no Letare in Lent, and the Ceremony of the Golden
Rose takes place on Easter Monday. See the Sermon of Innocent III (od.
1216): In Dominica Larvae, stu DE Rosa. It says that the Rose contains:
(1) the gold of which it is made, (2) the musk, and (3) the balm, both of which
it exhales. They refer to the three substances of Christ : (1) His human
nature, represented by the unalterable gold ; (2) His immaculate soul, repre-
sented by the musk ; and (3) His Deity, represented by the balm.

2 According to another legend, the blossoming of the Rose occurred for
the first time when Christ was born ; its petals folded up at the Crucifixion,
but opened again at Easter. Mr. W. S. Hunter, already quoted, mentions :
(1) that no true Roses are found in Palestine, except on the Lebanon ;
(2) that the Rose of Sharon has been sometimes regarded as a species of tulip
or narcissus. JY have seen a dried specimen of the Rose of Jericho, which

88

-- Page 115 --
Symbolism of the Rose and Cross
Roselen is a German title of the Virgin. I need hardly
mention the devotion of the Holy Rosary, instituted by
St. Dominic—the prayers of which appear to have been
symbolised as Roses—or its close analogue, the Rosaries
of Chinese Buddhists! In its attribution to Mary, the
Rose became a symbol of virginity.

Through the Christian centuries—from the fourth to
the thirteenth—there grew up more or less secretly, under
the egis of the New Law, that Secret Tradition in Israel
which is represented by the Srpurr Ha Zouwak, its connec-
tions and dependencies. This great work is rich with
allusions scattered up and down the text to the Rose and
its symbolism. Indeed, the first intimations on the subject
occur in the opening words of the preliminary portion,
where one of the mystical doctors initiates a certain con-
ference with a quotation from the Sonc or SoLomon:
“As the Rose among thorns, so is my beloved among the
daughters.”* We learn in this place (1) that the Rose
signifies the Community of Israel; (2) that its colour,
unfolds in water and for this reason is called the Resurrection Flower
According to his traditional History, Christian Rosy Cross went to Damascus,
the place of the Damask Rose, and Hakluyt—writing apparently in 1582—
says that Dr. Linaker brought in “‘ the Damask Rose in time of memory ”—
presumably within recent years. Dr. Linaker was physician to Henry VII
and Henry VIII. See Voyaczs, Vol. II. The place to which it was brought
was presumably England. This item of plant-lore might not be without
consequence in the history of the Rosy Cross, but unfortunately the ArcHmo-
Locicat Journat, Vol. XIV, p. 271, gives a Bill of Medicine furnished for the
use of Edward I—tempus 1306-7—as follows: Item pro Aqua rosata de
Damaso, lb. xl. iiiili.

* In Tue Rostcructan anp Masonic Recorp, No. 1, 1876, a certain
Dr. Bell ventured to suggest that the Rosy Cross may have been derived
from the Rosary, which “thas in German the appellation of Rosencrantz.”
The notion is of course preposterous, more especially as Rosicrucianism was
a mouthpiece of Reform in Germany.

* Compare Eccxzsrasticus: “I was exalted as a rose-plant in Jericho,”
Cap. xxiv, v. 18. The Vuncare renders: guasi plantatio rose in Fericho.
As regards the Zoharic quotation from the Sone oF Sotomon, the authorised
Version reads: “As a Lily among thorns,” for once agreeing with the
Vuucate: Sicut lilium inter spinas,

89

-- Page 116 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
which is red or white, has reference to the severity and
mercy which alternate in the life of Israel; (3) that its
five petals allude to the five ways of salvation and five
gates of grace; (4) that it symbolises also the cup of
benedictions and even the chalice of salvation.1 We are
told elsewhere that Adam, while still unfallen, tended
the Roses of Paradise.2 The Rose, however, is more
especially a symbol of Shekinah, whose rule extends on
the right and left side of the Tree of Life in Kabalism,
and obtains also in the middle, because of her office in
Ma xxuts, considered as the kingdom of this world. On
the severity side of the Tree Hop is in correspondence
with the Red Rose, while Nerzacu on the mercy side has
the White Rose for its emblem. The union of red and
white produces the Rose of Matxutu,* and the plural-form
Roses has reference to the Shekinah above—in the trans-
cendence—and in manifestation, or in the world below.®
The Rose has also an important place as a symbol of sex
spiritualised, for the name is applied to Shekinah in her
desire after union with the King.®

Shekinah comes before us in the Zonwar somewhat
strangely confused amidst male and female aspects.

1 Zonar I, fol. 1a. The five petals allude to the Rose-calyx. We hear
otherwise of thirteen petals, which are the thirteen Paths of Mercy. See
also Zouar III, fol. 233b., in which there is a legend concerning Solomon, to
whom a Rose is brought by an eagle, as a symbol of the Community of Israel.

? See my Srcrer Docrrine in Israzz, p. 72. Compare Dracontius :
Carmen vz Deo, Lib. I, v. 437. He says of Adam and Eve walking in the
garden: Ibant per flores et lata rosaria bini, i.e, amidst flowers and great
bosks of roses.

° Datur Rosa rubea‘et “alba, Hop et Nevzacn; quandoque autem rubedo
predominatur in rosa, quandoque albedo; sic aliquando Hop, altquando
Nerzacu prevalet :—Knorr von Rosenroth: Kaszata Denupara. Appara-
tus, p. 708.

4 The Rose in Marxura it said to contain red and white—meaning a
blush Rose—and these colours denote stimulation towards the right and the
left side—a reference to the Sephirotic Tree of Life.—Jbid.

5 Ibid., p. 709.

* Lbid., p. 333.

-- Page 117 --
Symbolism of the Rose and Cross

I cannot remember that she is ever saluted by the title
of Rose of Sharon, which indeed is applied once to Rabbi
Simeon, the head and fount of theosophical tradition in
Jewry. ‘The case of Shekinah seems therefore analogous
to that other confusion which I have mentioned, namely,
that the Rose of Sharon or flos campz is referred in Christian
symbolism indifferently to Mary the Mother and her Divine
Son. But St. Mary, as the great patron and type-in-chief
of virginity, appears as the poles asunder from the Most
Holy Shekinah, who has a high office in nuptials and does
not extend her protection to man except through the bond
of wedlock. Yet is there the shadow of a link between them,?
for she who above all in Christendom is Virgo singularis
et inter omnes mitis is mother as well as virgin, and Shekinah
presides over motherhood. The idea of these two sym-
bolical personalities, both full of grace and beauty, both
uplifted beyond all heights of sanctity, yet—amidst their
assumption and transcendence—both so near to earth,
grew up in complete independence, each unknown to
each. A Litany of Shekinah might, I think, be constructed
out of the Zonar and would not be less decorative or
less pregnant with meaning than the Litany of Loretto,
though—as I have had occasion to point out elsewhere—
she who was Marrona in the heights and Marrona also
in manifestation was no object of ceremonial devotion,
like Mary the Mother, among any sect in Jewry. Beside
both emblems there persisted also the remanents of pre-

1 Compare F. W. Hackwood: Curist Lore, 1902. “The Madonna is
the Rose of Sharon,” p. 26. It is an uncritical statement in the light of the
dual attribution mentioned above.

2 Mr. Wigston reminds us that Dante connects the Rose with “ the
ineffable Light of Shekinah.’”—Twuer Cozumsus or Lirerarurs, p. 193.

® Compare Dante in Longfellow’s translation :

There is the Rose in which the Word Divine
Became incarnate.—Parapiso, Canto XXII,
Mary is therefore the Christian Shekinah.
gI

-- Page 118 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
Christian myth and legend. The Rose of Mary was more
especially the White Rose, and it is said that the Red Rose
continued for long to be related with Holda, the Northern
goddess. "There is also the beautiful fable of Lauvin and
his Rose-Garden, which takes us into the Land of Faerie,
where the Rose was under special protection. In another
category of symbolism the Rose is womanhood, and as
such it is an erotic emblem. ‘The presence of this intima-
tion is, I think, to be found everywhere and has not been
put away altogether but rather transformed and sanctified
when the gracious type has been lifted into the spiritual
world. ‘Tvhus the Rose is a symbol of Mary because of her
motherhood, but in relation to her it belongs to divine
things, even as she herself stands on the threshold of Deity,
being Spouse of the Divine Spirit and bearer of the Divine
Word made flesh. So also is the Rose of Shekinah a
Divine Rose, as she whom it typifies is Divine Mother
of souls.

But the material and sensuous aspects flourished in their
own sphere, and in France of the twelfth century the
symbol was enthroned in imperishable literature by the
allegorical poem called Tur Romance or THE Rosr. Therein
it is said that the leaves of the flower enclose the Art of
Love. In the four-square garden of the poem the Dreamer
sees “a rose-bush, charged with many a rose,” and

Amongst them all,.
My rapturous eyes on one did fall,
Whose perfect loveliness outvied
All those beside it.
This is the Rose which he desires to kiss and is so enabled
to do after many trials, for which rashness long suffering

» In Christian Iconography the Rosebud has been said to designate the
Incarnation. See Dictionnaire Arcu$oLociur Er ExPLICATIF DE LA SCIENCE
DE Brason, Par le Comte Alphonse O’Kelly de Galway, Tom. I, got.

g2

-- Page 119 --
Symbolism of the Rose and Cross

befalls him. On a later occasion he attempts to gather
the treasure, hoping to possess it hencefortht—

I raised my hand in hope to hold

At last that lovely Rose that I

Had craved so long and ardently.
But Danger, Fear and Shame combine to drive him away.
Venus and Cupid intervene at the end to help him, and

La conclusion du Rommant

Est, que vous voyez cy P Amant

Qui prent la Rose a son plaisir

En qui estoit tout son desir—
which means that the pilgrim of earthly love at last attained
his guerdon, and the poem affirms in its final couplet :

Nature rit, st com mot semble,

Quant hic et bec joingnent ensemble.
The ultimate line unfolds in full the allegorical meaning
of the Rose, according to Le Roman pe ta Ross, or at
least according to Clopinel, that minstrel by whom it was
completed.

It must be said that it is the Rose in the ashpits, as other
parts of the poem make only too clear ; but there is another
medizval memorial, in which we are taken farther to the
heights than Jean de Meung places his symbol in the depths.
I speak of the Rose of Dante, the Rose of his Seventh
Heaven, where the Beatrice of his blessed vision is enthroned
in Paradise.

There is a light above, which visible
Makes the Creator unto every creature,
Who only in beholding Him has peace,
And it expands itself in circular form
To such extent, that its circumference
Would be too large a girdle for the sun.
The semblance of it is all made of rays

 T have used the translation of Mr. F. 8, Ellis, published in the Temrre
Crassics, 3 vols., 1900.

93

-- Page 120 --
The Brotherhood «

Reflected from the top of
Which takes therefrom vi
And asa hill in water at i
Mirrors itself, as if to see
When affluent most in ve.
So ranged aloft all round
Mirrored I saw in more r:
All who above there have
And if the lowest row col
So great a light, how vast
Is of this Rose in its extre
Into the yellow of the Ro
That spreads and multipli
Of praise into the ever-ve
As one who silent is and f
Me Beatrice drew on !4
And again :

In fashion then as of a sn
Displayed itself to me the

Whom Christ in His own
But the other host, that {

1 Lume é lassu, che visibile.
Lo Creatore a quelle ere
Che solo in Lui vedere h

E si distende in circular fi
In tanto, che la sua circ
Sarebba al sol troppo lar

Fassie di raggio tutta sua
Riflesso al sommo del me
Che prende quindi viver

E come clivo in acqua di s1
Si spechia, quasi per vee
Quando é nel verde e ne

St, soprastando al lume in
Vidi specchiarst in pin
Quanto di not lassi fai

E se Pinfimo grado in sé ri
Si grande lume, quant é
Di questa rosa nell’ estre

Nel giallo della rosa semp
Che si dilata e digrada
Odor di lode al Sol che s

Qual é colui che tace e dit
Mi trasse Beatrice —P:

94

f the Rosy Cross

Primal Motion,
tality and power.

ts base

its beauty

‘dure and in flowers,
about the light,

inks than a thousand
from us returned,
lect within it

the amplitude

mest leaves! .. .

se Eternal

es, and breathes an odour
rnal Sun,

ain would speak,

ow-white rose
: saintly host,
blood had made His bride,

lying sees and sings

face

atura

ala sua pace ;
cura

mn ferenZa

ga cintura.
parvenza

bile primo,

€ @ potenza.

L0 1m0

lersit adorno,

| florette opimo 3
LOTnO intOrnd, :%
di mille soglie”
to ha ritorno.
rccoghie

la larghezza

me foglie?...—Par. XXX, 100-17.
ern,

e redole

empre verna,

er vuole,

R. XXX, 124-128,


-- Page 121 --
Symbolism of the Rose and Cross
The glory of Him Who doth enamour it,
And the goodness that created it so noble,
Even as a swarm of bees, that sinks in flowers
One moment, and the next returns again
To where its labour is to sweetness turned,
Sank into the great flower, that is adorned
With leaves so many, and thence reascended
To where its love abideth evermore.
Their faces had they all of living flame,
And wings of gold, and all the rest so white
Not snow unto that limit doth attain! 1
This high mystical import of the Rose-symbol and the
spiritual enfoldment thereof are things to be distinguished
from Rosicrucianism per se in its early presentation: we shall
find in due course that they belong to another category.
The Rose of Dante recalls, however, the imputed Rose of
Khunrath,? which is Christian Kabalism presented in
summary form. It suggests on the surface that the German
mystic had borrowed from the Italian poet, but a little
examination will save us from being misled by one of
Eliphas Lévi’s recurring false analogies. There is no justi-
fication—as I have intimated—for regarding the ninth
Diagram of Khunrath—or his editor—as intended to repre-
sent a Rose. It is a great pictorial circle, within which is
1 In forma dunque di candida rosa
Mi st mostrava la milizia santa
Che nel suo sangue Cristo fece sposa ;
Ma Paltra, che volant vede ¢ canta
La gloria di Colui che la innamora,
E la bonta che la fece cotanta,
Si com schiera d’api, che infiora
Una fiata ed una si ritorna
La dove suo lavoro Sinsapora ;
Nel gran fior discendeva che ?adorna
Di tante foghie, e quindi risaliva
La dove il suo amor sempre soggiorna.
Le facce tutte avean di fiamma viva,
E Pak @ oro, e Paltrio tanto bianco,
Che nulla neve a quel termine arriva—Par. XXXI.
? AMPHITHEATRUM Sarienti@ ETERN®, 1609.
95

-- Page 122 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

a figure of ten sides, containing the names or titles of the
nine choirs of angels and the souls of the blessed ones.
Within this figure is a ring of clouds penetrated by rays
of light, representing the ten Sepuirotu drawn into a kind
of circle, in the uppermost part of which there is indicated
the Divine Darkness of din Soph, or God in the unknowable
Above this is a radiant triad of light, inscribed with the
Sacred Name of ten letters, formed from the four con-
sonants of Jehovah. The Sephirotic rays are an extension
of the glory proceeding from a Great Sun of Righteousness,
inscribed with the Hebrew characters composing JEHESHUAH,
while in the centre of this Sun is represented Finrus veri
Der, the Christ of Palestine, an unclothed figure, “ with
arms extended in the sacred cruciform sign,” encompassed
by the Divine Names ascribed to the Szpuirotu, and with
a great pheenix at His feet.1 There is nothing attaching
to the question if we elect to call this a Rose of Christ in
Kabalism, but two other diagrams follow immediately—
being seven and eight in the series of Khunrath—and the
designation—though it does not happen to have been made
—would apply to these also with equal force. I am willing
to add that the theosophical doctrine of the ninth diagram
is so much in consonance with the theosophy of the Rosy
Cross that it might have appeared in Robert Fludd’s
vast treatise on the Macrocosm.

Having thus described at some length a pre-Rosicrucian
symbol, I will cite in conclusion of my study on the Rose
in Symbolism the following intimations of Michael Maier,

1 See my translation of Eliphas Lévi’s Hisrory or Macic, second edition,
1922, p. 354, note 2, The French magus misconceived the significance of
the Rose in symbolism, whether Christian or Kabalistic. He calls it (1) the
flesh in rebellion against the spirit; (2) Nature affirming that she is a
daughter of God ; (3) love refusing to be stifled by celibacy ; (4) humanity
aspiring towards natural religion, All this is the imagery of romance and
very suggestive as such ; but it is not the secret tradition or the doctrine of
the Rosy Cross,

96

-- Page 124 --
Symbolism of the Rose and Cross

when he is not testifying as if an expert Brother of the Rosy
Cross but as an alchemist only.1 He says: (1) That the
Rose is the first, most beautiful and perfect of all flowers.
(2) That it is guarded because it is a virgin, and the guard
is thorns. (3) That the Gardens of Philosophy are planted
with many roses, both red and white. (4) That these
colours are in correspondence with gold and silver. (5)
That the centre of the Rose is green and is emblematical
of the Green Lion, a familiar emblem to the Wise. (6)
That even as the natural Rose is a pleasure to the senses
and life of man, on account of its sweetness and salubrity,
so is the Philosophical Rose exhilarating to the heart and
a giver of strength to the brain. (7) That as the natural
Rose turns to the sun and is refreshed by rain, so is the
Philosophical Matter prepared in blood, grown in light,
and in and by these made perfect. Hereof is the Rose in
alchemy.?

I have quoted this only as presenting a point of view,
possibly within the circle of the Order, but we shall see
that Michael Maier differs from the majority of exponents
respecting the sacramental name of the Fellowship. We
have now to glance at the isolated symbol of the Cross and
can set aside at once the mass-in-chief of its traditional
history as extending beyond our concern. The archzology
of the subject was of little or no consequence to the Brethren
of the Rosy Cross, and they shewed an equivalent concern
therein. We do not hear that it was uplifted in Egypt,
either as a prophetic sign or otherwise as an important

1 See Septmawa PuiLosopuica, cap. 4.

* Tt is at least one of the aspects, and perhaps the most fully developed,
for—outside the lexicons, which tell us that Rosa—Tartar—the symbol enters
commonly into the romance of imaginative titles, such as the Rosarrum
PurtosopHorum of Arnoldus de Villanova, the Rosartum Novum of Figulus
and several others. Robert Fludd, who seems to have cared little enough for
the interminable elaborations of conventional alchemical symbolism, saw
nothing in the Rosicrucian Rose but an emblem of the Precious Blood.

H 97

-- Page 125 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
symbol. They know nothing of the mythical or traditional
crucifixions of deities in heathen religions They might
have characterised them roughly—had they known—as
inventions of that diabolus who is said to be the ape of
God and produces blasphemous imitations because he
cannot create. I question whether they were aware that
there is an unrecognised cross in Zoharic Kabalism, drawn
from the four cardinal points to a centre and that above
this centre is the Sacred Rose of Shekinah. It is a matter
of inference from the great text and not a formulated
image, while the figure in question would delineate a
Cosmic Cross—that is to say, having equal arms. Had the
fact of this inference been known in much earlier days,
the doctors of the Zouar would have been presented to
our notice as Brethren of the Rosy Cross and Rabbi Simeon
as the first Imperator. There is a cross also of the four
elements among the types and images of alchemy: of
this the Rosicrucians knew; on this also they dwelt—
in the mind at least—because of another Cross with which
we know that they were concerned, the Cross of Divine
Mystery, raised upon the Mount of Calvary. There are
testimonies concerning it in the writings of Robert Fludd
and elsewhere in the literature.?

The Cross in alchemy will not detain us long: it is
that of the four elements of ancient physics, and behind

1 Most of these fables bear, however, very obvious marks of manufacture,
among which may be specified (1) the alleged crucifixion of Indra or Buddha
for robbing a garden of a flower, and (2) that of the air-god in Mexico, who
is said to have been nailed to a Cross.

* They must be distinguished from the Cross-lore of Christendom, some
of which is very old, as Graal literature testifies. Neither Robert Fludd nor
any other of the Rosicrucian “ fire-philosophers ” was concerned with the
side of legend. He might otherwise have found something to his purpose
in the tradition that the Cross of Calvary was made from the wood of that
Tree of Knowledge which looms largely in Zoharic reveries, and is said to
become the Tree of Life when the soul ascends to perfection. He would
remember of course that the Tree of Calvary is called mystically the Tree
° Are,

98

-- Page 126 --
Symbolism of the Rose and Cross
these is an unity, which is called quintessence in the great
veil of words, though it is known by many names. A
mystical axiom found in Rosicrucian literature affirms that
In Cruce, sub sphera,
Venit sapientia vera,
thus interpreting the astronomical sign of Venus as an
emblem of the Life of life and the planet itselfi—understood
of course spiritually—as representing, in the astrology of
the soul, that law which governs the Second Birth. The
wisdom reached in the Venusian Cross is that which follows
the inward process of purification, effected in the four
parts of human personality—or body, mind, desire and
will in purpose—the Cross of our own nature, corresponding
on the hidden side of Rosicrucian teaching to the Cross of
the four elements. On this account the star Venus is said
to shine before the Portal of Regenerated Life. There is,
however, on the external side another axiom, namely,
In Cruce salus, and although it may be taken assuredly to
intimate the same spiritual mystery, it is understood
alchemically as referring to the Cross of the physical ele-
ments, in which the matter of the quintessence abides,
or otherwise of the Philosophical Stone. The wisdom of
this Cross is therefore that of the Great Work accomplished ;
and Venus, who carries a Cross beneath the circle of her
symbol, came to signify the Matter of the Work in one or
other of its stages. An ingarnering of this kind might be
carried much further, and we should find Arnoldus de
Villanova and Jean de Roquetaillade comparing the Cross
of the elements with the signum magnum of Calvary and
the volatilisation of the fixed and igneous part of their
Philosophical Matter with the uplifting of the Son of
Man upon the Cross, a glorified state being that which
followed by the hypothesis in both cases. But it is enough
for the purpose in view to shew that there is a Cross in
99

-- Page 127 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
alchemy, as there is indeed also a Rose, which is said to
signify Tartarum Philosophicum.

That the symbolism of the Cross in alchemy was reflected
into the Order of the Rosy Cross there can be no need to
debate, and from this it would seem to follow that their
characteristic signum was a Cross with equal arms, other-
wise a Macrocosmic Cross. "There is, however, no means
of knowing. We shall see that on a memorable occasion,
in one of his traditional histories, Christian Rosy Cross
bound “ a blood-red ribbon, cross-wise upon his shoulder,”
presumably after the manner of a Knight Templar. It
may have been a Calvary Cross or it may not. None of
the early documents explain their chief symbol. On the
other hand, it is inferentially likely that Simon Studion’s
allusions to the Rose and Cross may have corresponded
roughly to the Rose-Croix definition, when it says that the
Cross is the Cross of Christ, ‘‘ red with the Precious Blood.”
So also in the hands of Robert Fludd it became, if it was
not originally, a Passion Cross. As such it was regarded
by John Heydon at a later epoch in the seventeenth century ;
but when the time came for the Rosicrucian SEcreT
Symzots to be published at Altona the Cross of Calvary
and the Cross with equal arms are both recurring symbols.
Between these forms the question of the symbol lies: it
matters nothing at the moment that it became in the
seventeenth century the peculiar Patriarchal Cross delineated
by the Tree of Life in late Kabalism. The St. Andrew’s
Cross lies outside our concern also until we come to adjudi-
cate on a particular claim as to the foundation of the
Brotherhood, and I have set aside implicitly what-
soever belongs to the Crux ansata, the Tau Cross and the
Swastika. They entered neither into the mind of occult
sciences in Germany of 1614 nor into Lutheran reveries
of 1586. To make an end of this matter, we are
not called upon to find judgment in favour of any

-- Page 128 --
Symbolism of the Rose and Cross
one of the admissible forms, as there is no evidence
before us.

I pass now to the conjunction of Rose and Cross, con-
stituting the distinctive Rosicrucian emblem. The follow-
ing points may be noted in the first place. (1) The earliest
example of the Rose in union with the Cross is perhaps
the frontispiece of a work by Jacob Locher, issued at
Nuremberg in 1517. It exhibits a great circle of Roses,
having a Cross in the centre and the figure of the Christ
thereon.!. There is, however, no reason to suppose that
the circle is other than an ornamental border. (2) In what
are called the “ages of faith,’ we hear of the Cross gar-
landed at Easter with wreaths of Roses; but these flowers
were combined with lavender and other sweet herbs.?
The fact belongs obviously to popular devotion. (3) Luther
adopted a Cross emerging from a Rose as his coat of arms,
and if this choice were of common knowledge at the period,
it might well account for any wealth of Rose and Cross
symbolism in the reveries of Simon Studion and his anti-
papal apocalypse.? (4) The armorial bearings of Johann
Valentin Andrez were a St. Andrew’s Cross, having Roses
in the four angles; but this fact belongs to a later part
of our inquiry. It is stated here so that no point of moment
may be missed in a representative sequence. Meanwhile
it belongs to heraldry. (5) The Cross in heraldry is called

1 The work is called Rosarrum.

2 The authority in this case is the Rev. Hilderic Friend: Frowers anp
Frower-Lorg, 2 vols., 1892. But it does not appear that the devotional
custom is represented by late or early memorials of Christian Art, so far as
Roses are concerned. Louisa Twining’s SymBots anp Empiems or Earty
and Mepuevan Curistian Art, 1852, contains many examples of ancient
Crosses, some decorated or encompassed with flowers and some with flowers
springing from them. The examples are taken from the Catacombs,
Lombardy and other parts of Italy, etc., but the Rose is not included.

3 According to Sédir, op. cit., the device of Luther was a Cross and four
Roses, but he is thinking of the arms of Andrew. Another story says that
Luther adopted the Rose simply, which is certainly wrong.

IolI

-- Page 129 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

“the first honourable ordinary,” and the heraldic Rose is
always full-blown, with the petala or “ flower-leaves ”
expanded, “‘ seeded in the middle and backed by five green
barbs, or involucra,” 1 between the five petals, the true
Rosicrucian symbol being also a five-petalled Rose, like
that of the Zouar. (6) Among coats of arms belonging to
families in Great Britain there are examples of (a) a Cross
between four Roses gules; (b) Arg. a Cross engr. sa.,
between four Roses ppr.; (¢) a Cross patty between four
Roses arg.; (d) Az., a Cross arg. between four Roses or ;
(e) Az., a Cross engraved or, between four Roses arg.”
It is certain that these and many other analogous devices
of Blazonry go further back than the end of the sixteenth
century, and therefore unless the symbol described perhaps
in Naometria and implied by the title of Fratres Rosee
Crucis in the first manifestoes of the Order was “a single

3 See William Berry: Encycropmpia Heratpica, Vol. I, 1828.

® These examples will be found in Papworth’s Atpuaserican DicTIoNaRY
or Coats or Arms. In the Dicrionnarrs AncHtoLociquz of O'Kelly,
already cited, it is said of heraldic Crosses that the red is more especially
Spanish, and the golden Cross English. ‘The French is silver, the Italian
blue, the German black or orange, and the Saxon green. The Crux rosea, or
Rosy Cross, might be simply a Cross of that colour—e.g. “red with the
Precious Blood ”—but the tradition and its memorials are both against
this view. In my opinion Mr, Wigston is substantially right when he says
that the Rosicrucian emblem was “a crucified Rose,” whether or not the
Cross was mounted on a Calvary. See Francis Bacon, Poet, Prophet and
Philosopher, p. 317. I mean that this was the general or characteristic sign,
adopted when. the title of Rosy Cross was formulated as a symbol. When the
Brotherhood in one of its revivals or developments became Ordo Rose@ et
Aurea Crucis, the emblem was a golden Cross emblazoned with a red Rose.
It appears in this form as a Cross with equal arms in the Szcrer SymBoLs, but
there are also examples of a golden Calvary Cross, charged in the same
manner. Iam not very often in agreement with Mr. Wigston, and I record
this instance gladly, because he was a good knight-errant, on a forlorn and
hopeless quest. He dwells much in another place on the Rose and Heart
symbol in Bacon’s “ advertisement ” of the Hoty War, saying—correctly,
as [have no doubt—that it is found in no other volume printed by Haviland,
but that it occurs many years after on the title-page of one of Heydon’s
works, In any case, however, the emblem does not belong to our subject, as
the Cross is absent.

102

-- Page 130 --
Symbolism of the Rose and Cross
Rose upon a Passion Cross,” it was neither unknown nor
of great rarity.

I have not taken the whole emblematical science of
heraldry as my province, but I have made such inquiries
as are relevant to the case and sufficient, I believe, to establish
the individual point, on the basis of which it appears
correct to affirm that a Rose centred in a Calvary Cross
at the meeting-point of the arms is not known in heraldry,
while the same statement applies to the so-called Macro-
cosmic Cross or Cross with equal arms, bearing a Rose
in its centre. Outside heraldry the marriage of Rose and
Cross is not to be found in printed books prior to the
seventeenth century, and I know not of any manuscript
illustrated by such a device or alluding to such symbolism
till long after the Fama Frarernitatis was addressed to
the literati of Europe—the unprinted Naomerria of
Studion being always possibly excepted. I have followed
deceptive byways in many barren directions, seeking traces
of the union. There is John Yarker, for example, who loved
nothing better than enticing an unwary traveller into his
pirate-bus and driving into a cul-de-sac. He mentions
Jacobus Typotus, who wrote Symsota Divina in 1601,
and “ under the symbol of the Holy Cross is supposed to
shew his knowledge of Knights Rosez Crucis.” By whom
supposed does not happen to appear, and an examination
of the elaborate devices given in the work of Typotus
fails to produce even one solitary example of the Rose and
Cross in union.t

1 The full title is Symsoza Divina er Humana Pontiricum, ImpeErRa-
ToruM, Recum: accessit brevis Isagoge Iac. Typotii. 3 vols., 1601, 1602,
1603. Among many Eucharistic emblems, there is an altar inscribed on the
front with a sun and the words: Sali Deo Honos et Gloria within the solar
disc. In the centre is 1s. On the altar is a chalice inscribed Et sanguis meus
vere est potus, completing the sentence on the Sacred Host raised above the
chalice—i.e. Caro mea vere est cibus, surrounding a crucifix, A solar glory
encompasses Host and Chalice, while a Dove—sign of the Holy Spirit—is

103

-- Page 131 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

It is necessary at this point to make an apparent digres-
sion and to establish in the first place—as we shall see at
length in the next chapter—that when the Fama FRaTERNI-
TaTis first appeared at Cassel in 1614 it was described on
the title-page as Fama... des loblichen Ordens des
Rosenkreuzes, otherwise the Honourable Order of the Rosy
Cross.t_ It follows that there was no mistake possible
from the beginning as to the name of the Brotherhood or
the significance of the letters R -.C -., when such an abbre-
viated form was substituted in later reprints. This not-
withstanding, in the year 1618, the German alchemist
Michael Maier, who became a chief spokesman of the
Order, affirms as follows: (1) that when the Society first
became known in writing the letters R..C.. were taken
to signify Rosy Cross; (2) that this is erroneous and, as
explained by the Brethren themselves, the said initials
denote the name of their founder. Where such an explana-
tion is given I do not claim to know, but it is said to be in
“ subsequent writings.” ‘The contention is entirely hollow,
for it transpired so early as 1616 that—mythical, traditional
or historical, as the case may be—the name of the “ careful
and wise father” and founder was Christian Rosencreutz.
Ab origine symboli therefore the Order was either that
of the Rosy Cross or of the traditional person who
was said to bear the name. It needs only to be
above the glory, amidst a radiant cloud. I have mentioned this emblem at
length because late Rosicrucian Doctrine connotes a very high aspect of the
Eucharistic Mystery. Another device is called Symbolum Sancta Crucis,
and shews a pelican in its piety on the summit of a Calvary Cross, thus
corresponding by antithesis to the Masonic Rose-Croix jewel, which has a
pelican at the foot of the Cross. It is a well-known symbol of our Saviour,
and the doctrinal reason is given in literal form in the Ritual of the Eighteenth
Degree, The pelican has been described as an early Rosicrucian symbol, but
T have not found the evidence.
I The fact disposes of a favoured thesis advanced by Mrs. Henry Pott
in Baconian interests, namely, that “the title Rosicrucian was... never
given or adopted until after the publication of the Cuymicat Marriace OF
CurisTIan Rosencrevtz, in 1616.”

104

-- Page 132 --
Symbolism of the Rose and Cross

added that Maier proceeds forthwith to stultify his
correction by giving a personal interpretation of the
letters RC .., but it is unintelligible in the absence
of a key.1

After an interval of some ten years Michael Maier was
succeeded by a French writer, Petrus Gassendus, who in
certain strictures on the philosophy of Robert Fludd, the

1 See Maier’s Sympora Aurem Mensm, 1617. It affirms: (1) that
R=Pegasus and C=Lilium, which appears nonsense, and the Lexicon
Aucuemi® of Rulandus, 1612, knows nothing of such terms. It is not till
late in the eighteenth century that Antoine Joseph Pernety hazards a
Hermetic interpretation of the winged offspring of Medusa and the Fountain
of Hippocrene on Helicon, produced by a stroke of his hoof. He also explains
Lilium as Philosophical Tincture, otherwise the Perfect Elixir of Hermetic
Art. See Fares Eoypriennes, Livre III, c. 14, §3, and DicrionNarRE
Myruo-Hermeétique, p. 249. (2) That the arcanum of the name reposes in
the formula: d. wmme. zii, w. sgqq hka.x. It is concerned with the hoof
of the Red Lion—i.e., the matter of the Mastery in the fixed or prepared
state, “ or the drops of the Hippocrene Fountain.” ‘his is the language of
cipher : it is neither of Alchemy nor of the Rosy Cross. There was presum-
ably a key to its meaning, but the keeper of that key was Maier and with him
it was buried at Magdebourg. The antiquarian scholarship of 1836,
represented by our old friend Godfrey Higgins, was cryptic after another
manner on the same subject, as a characteristic specimen will shew.
“Nazareth, the town of Nazir or Nafwpatos, the flower, was situated in
Carmel, the vineyard or garden of God. Jesus was a flower ; whence came
the adoration, by the Rosicrucians, of the Rose and Cross, which Rose was
Ras, and this Ras, or knowledge or wisdom, was stolen from the garden,
being also crucified, as he literally is, on the red cornelian, the emblem of the
Rosicrucians—a Rose on a Cross. This crucified flower-plant was also LIBER,
a book, a letter or tree, or Bacchus or IHY. This IH> was Logos, Linga,
letters, LTR=650. The God was, moreover, called Rose or Ras, because
he was R || 200, O=70, Z=9g0= 360, or Rose=365; RS=RST=600; the
Rose of the Water, or W ater-rose, as it is termed to this day. But this Rose of
Sharon, this Logos, this word, was called in Arabic and Chaldean werta and
werd, the same as our word. Thus it was both the Linga, the generative
principle, and Lingua, a word, or words, language.”’—Anacatyrsis, Vol. II,
p. 240. Here is cipher also, but it can be decoded by going through the two
quarto volumes. It is sufficient for my purpose to say that all these instituted
analogies and identities between things lying far apart in myth, symbol and
old religion, rest on etymologies as they stood at the Higgins period, with
himself as chief mouthpiece, and for us at the present day they read like
records of nightmare.

10$§

-- Page 133 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
English Rosicrucian,? affirmed (1) that the name of the
-Order is not compounded of Rosa and Crux; (2) that this
and other interpretations have been put forward “ by the
chemists themselves ” for the sake of imposing on others ;
(3) that it is composed in reality of Ros=Dew and Crux=
Cross; (4) that Dew is the most powerful of all natural
dissolvents; (5) that the figure of a Cross exhibits the
letters of the word Lux=Light, at a single view; (6) that
Lux signifies in alchemy the seed or menstruum of the Red
Dragon, otherwise that “ crude and corporeal light which,
if properly concocted and digested, produces gold”; (7)
that a Rosicrucian is therefore a philosopher who seeks for
light by means of dew, or otherwise for the substance of
the Philosopher’s Stone. ‘There is nothing in antecedent
Rosicrucian literature to sustain this statement and it must
be placed in the same category as that of the alchemist
Maier. ‘The original manifestoes are against it. I do not
pretend to understand how Gassendus proposed to revise
the Rosicrucian name, so that it should tolerate his rendering
and yet be intelligible Latin. Possibly his emendation
would have been Fratres Rorate Crucis. His criticism is,
however, so obscure upon this point that yet another
writer came forward and making short work of the Cross
in previous symbolism, as well as of the evidence offered
by Rosicrucian documents, substituted Fratres Roris Cocti,
though I am not aware that alchemy had a process for the
philosophical coction of dew.? The Rosicrucian Srcrer
Symzots of the eighteenth century are an eloquent com-
mentary unawares upon all these reveries, with which it
has been necessary to deal and which may be set aside

+ The tract was published in 1630 under the title of Eprstoxica
EXERcITATIO in qua precipue principia phtlosophie@ Robert Fludd deteguntur.
It was reprinted in the collected works of Gassendus as Examen PHILOSOPHIE
Fiuppanz. See Orera, III, especially p. 261.

* Eusebius Renaudot: Conrérences Pusuigues, IV, 87.

106

-- Page 134 --
Symbolism of the Rose and Cross

once and for all, though two of them have held the field
since they were popularised by Arnold and Mosheim.*

When a day came for the sacramental and mystical title
of Rosicrucian and Rosy Cross to be explained in intelligible
terms, the task—as already intimated—was undertaken in
a treatise which Robert Fludd most certainly inspired and
which embodies all his views, though it was not the work
of his hand. The various propositions may be brought
thus together: (1) The Cross is the sign or symbol of
Jesus Christ, of the Brotherhood in its inward dedication,
of pure mystical wisdom. (2) Its red colour represents the
mystical and divine blood of Christ, which—according to
the Apostle—cleanses from all sin. (3) It was borne on
the breasts of Christian Chivalries in the wars against ‘Turks
and Saracens. (4) This red Cross is adorned with roses
and lilies, because He unto Whom it refers is ‘‘ the Rose of

1 See G. C. A. von Harless: Jacos Béume unp pie ALCHYMISTEN, 1870,
pp. 114-16. Mr. Harold Bayley, op. cit, is another who elects to derive the
name Rosicrucian from “the words dew and cross,” which he interprets
cryptically by alluding to “ the honey-dew of knowledge rising and falling
again on the souls of men in odourous showers from the well of Truth.”
Where the Cross enters into this scheme of explanation does not appear.
However, the Rosicrucians—understood. as “a very secret society of learned
men ”’~are described as “ physicians in the highest sense of the term, because
they aim at restoring the bodily powers of man through the action of the
soul, fed by Divine wisdom and knowledge.” This is Rosicrucianism as it is
remade in the mind of reverie. It is to be understood that writers who
teproduce the views of Gassendus derive their knowledge from Mosheim,
whose Eccrzstastica, Hisrory became known widely through an English
translation. We may account in this manner for the cipher F..R..C..
being rendered Fratres Roris Cocti in Howard’s New Rovat Cyciopepta,
3 vols., n.d., but circa 1830. See s.v. Rosycrucians. The misstatements are
scandalous even for that period. The Order is said to have been first heard
of in Germany at the beginning of the sixteenth century ; Fludd, Maier and
Jacob Béhme are placed at its head. There is finally Mr. A. G. Mackey, a
famous American Mason, who rejects the Ros explanation and suggests
tentatively that “ the Rose being a symbol of secrecy and the Cross of light ”
their combination was “intended to symbolise the secret of the true light,
or the true knowledge, which the Rosicrucian Brotherhood were to give to
the world.”

107

-- Page 135 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
Sharon and the Lily of the Valley.” (5) Moreover, there
is placed in its centre a Rose “ of the colour of blood ” to
indicate the work of Sacred and Divine Alchemy in the
purification of that which is unclean, the completion and
perfection of which is “the full Rose on the Cross,” as
this is ‘‘ offered and transfixed in the centre.” The Brother-
hood of the Rosy Cross is therefore Fraternitas Christiana,
constituted by seekers for the Tree of Life in the Paradise
of God, an incorruptible seed of the Spirit. In fine, their
head is Christ, as ‘(the head of Christ is God.” The
essential Rosicrucian symbol is therefore a Red Rose
centred in a Red Calvary Cross, at the meeting-point of the
arms.?

It may be urged with considerable force that Fludd as
reflected in Fritz—was spiritualising the Rosy Cross; but
if it be said that he advances a purely personal understand-
ing, one answer to this would be that he may have been
working from within. We shall see later on that he speaks
with an authority which either connotes membership or
is inexplicable, having regard to his known character.
Moreover, he did not stand utterly alone: there was more
than one Rosicrucian document in circulation on the
Continent about the same period which suggests a similar
concern, though they are not so lucidly worded. Our
recurring source of reference, the SrcreT SYMBOLS, is so
much a witness in the same direction that it might be a
collection bequeathed by Fludd himself to Rosicrucian

1 See Summum Bonum, published at Frankfurt in 1629, under the name
of Joachimus Frizius. Also the Ven. Archdeacon Craven’s Dr. Rosert
Fiunp, pp. 142, 143. Elsewhere I believe that Fludd speaks of the Order
symbol as “the Cross of Christ dyed by his rose-red blood.” As regards
No, 3 in the text above, this statement may account for Dr. Alexander
Wilder in his usual state of confusion affirming that the “ Rose upon a Cross ”
was a badge of the Knights Templar. See Tue Metapnysicat Macazine,
Vol. III, pp. 417 ef seq., 1896. The reference of Joachim Fritz is to a cross
of crimson colour, which was the Templar Cross. The allusions of Summum
Bonum to the Rosicrucian symbol are drawn from several places of that work.

108

-- Page 136 --
Symbolism of the Rose and Cross
posterity, though it is actually a work of the late eighteenth
century. In and about the year 1650, the alchemist
Thomas Vaughan, debating Rosicrucian theosophy, may
obviously have reflected his precursor, the man of Kent ;
but it is a point to observe that he interpreted the claims
of the Order, in the sense of that Holy Quest which is the
Quest of Christ in God. And though others may have
prompted his views, he was much too individual to reflect
merely like a glass.

Among recent writers, Mr. Wigston, whom I have quoted
previously, says that the crucified Rose of the Rosicrucian
“hints at the entire Logos legend in a mystical sense.” }
Mr. W. S. Hunter, whom I have also cited, is a stultifying
person, even for a Masonic Rosicrucian of the “ Metre-
politan College.” After the manner of one who makes
a personal discovery, he mentions that the Rose was “‘ ap-
plied” to Christ, but the Rose on a Cross signifies “ the
secret of Immortality.” 2 Why and after what manner
he omits to explain. So also John Yarker affirms “a
Masonic tradition,” not otherwise specified, ‘‘ which says
that the first drop of blood which fell from our Lord’s
wounds was miraculously converted into a Rose,” adding
with inscrutable logic : ‘‘ Hence the union of the Rose and
Cross.” ? We may question others who pass as Masonic
literati to the same or as little purpose. Reghellini, in

1 It may be mentioned in this connection, apart from Rose-symbolism,
that the word Ros=Dew—but no doubt in its Greek form—was a Gnostic
emblem of Christ. The Ophites, moreover, held that the Dew which “ fell
from the excess of light was ”—? represented —‘ Wisdom,” understood as a
Hermaphroditic Deity. Mr. Wigston alluded presumably to another Logos
philosophy. W. F. C. Wigston: Tur Corumpus or Lirrrature, p. 195.
See also B. Theodoreti Quzstionss in Genes., Cap. XXVII, p. 91, edition
of 1772, and the same in Hreticorum Fasutorum Comrenpium, Liber I,
Cap. XIV, p. 307.

2 Rostcrucian anp Masonic Recorp, 1898.

3 Notes on THE ScizenTIFIc anD Rezicious Mysteries or ANTIQUITY,
1872, p. 31.

foe)

-- Page 137 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
comparatively early days, fulfils his duty towards the
symbol by presenting the Cross as a sign of union and the
Rose of Secrecy. On the other hand, Marc Saunier,
writing in 1911, is not alone assured that the secret science
of Christian Rosy Cross was a synthesis of all accepted
knowledge, but presents its characteristic symbol in terms
hitherto unknown. It was a star of twelve points, on which
a triangle was inscribed within a circle. A Cross within the
Delta was emblazoned with a Rose in full flower, and
beneath the Rose was a Pelican in its piety. The whole
symbol was further decorated by five stars, each of five
points, while a star of seven points was placed at the apex
of the Triangle. It is possible that such an emblem is
a Continental and probably French variant of the jewel
worn by Masons of the Scottish Rite in the Eighteenth
Degree of Rose-Croix, but it has certainly no connection
with German Rosicrucianism of 1614 or any later periad.?

A word may be said in conclusion as to the present theos-
ophy of the symbol within the circle of initiation, it being
understood that I speak under certain reserves, as the case
demands. In its primary sense the Rose-Cross is the typical
Christ-emblem, exhibiting the Divine Part in manifesta-
tion, not in immanence. A Calvary Cross bearing a Rose
of five petals is the Mystery of the Incarnation. The

1 Reghellini da Schio: La Maconnerte considérée comme le résultat des
Réligions Egyptiennes, Fuive et Chrétienne. We may compare the anony-
mous Maconnersz Pratious, 2 vols., 1885, which says that the Cross on
the Rose (ste) typifies human reproduction, understood as the only mode of
creation admitted by something termed “ pure reason ’—not otherwise
defined. The Rose signifies genitalia mulieris, while the point of intersection
of the four arms of the cross represents membrum virile. ‘The authority is J. M.
Ragon : Rirvex pu Grape pe Ross-Crorx, 1860, PP. 29 ef seq.

2 La Licrnpe prs Symuoxes Puiosopniqurs, Reiicieux ET Maconniques.
Deuxiéme édition. Paris, 1911. The symbol is interpreted as follows :
(1) Star of Twelve Points—=Signs of the Zodiac and their correspondences in
humanity. (2) Triangle=the immutable Trinity, which Saunier under-
stands in his folly as force, matter and movement. (3) Cross =the crucifixion
of movement in matter; involution of the soul in the four elements ;

IIo

-- Page 138 --
Symbolism of the Rose and Cross
Macrocosmic Cross bearing the same symbol in its
centre signifies the Grace and Power of the Word ruling
the whole creation. The Calvary Rose-Cross also repre-
sents man in the manifested state, having the soul abiding
in the four parts of personality. When a certain sacra-
mental sign is placed in the centre of the Rose, it is an
allusion to the Christ-Spirit dwelling in the soul and also
declared therein. When this sign is replaced by Dew, the
Ros Rosacee Crucis, it conveys the same notion, and that
also of the Spirit fructifying the soul. The most secret
key is: Angelus Domini nuntiavit Maria, et concepit de
Spiritu Sancto. It is the key also of that which out of all
hymns and canticles is termed Cantica Canticorum, the
great Song of Espousals and of Solomon. After this
manner is the pregnant and truly sacramental symbol
elevated, as with great reverence, out of the hands of the
honourable and Christian gentleman Robert Fludd. It is
elevated also, as if above official altars, and exposed like
a monstrance wherein is the Mystery of Christhood, “ the
truest and holiest that is in this world.” We shall find the
Rosicrucian Order among the purlieus of Protestant sects,
among the money-changers of spurious alchemy; but
we know antecedently in this manner that it is called
and chosen for great transmutations to come, and that
incarnation and death ; resurrection andimmortality. (4) Rose=that which
is born from the corpse and exhales itself in sweet odours. ‘This Rose
blossoms by following the example of the Bird, i.e. nourishing its starving
young with its own blood. (5) Pelican=Infinite Love =the Pheenix, setting
and rising Sun, Osiris and Horus, Christ accepting death for the weal of
man. The young which it feeds are body, soul and spirit. (6) Star of Five
Points=symbol of will transmuting passions and emotions. (7) Star of
Seven Points=the seven rungs of that ladder which the sage must ascend
if he would know the Holy Spirit—understood here as the Light in all its
splendour. It is seldom that any canon of interpretation betrays its own
invalidity so completely. Movement is not crucified in matter, which itself
is a mode of motion; there is no analogy in symbolism between the Rose
and the Pelican ; while to speak of a Rose nourishing its starving young is ta
confuse the images concerned.

111

-- Page 139 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
those among whom it originated knew not what they
did.

The conclusion meanwhile to be drawn from the findings
of this summary research is that if our first knowledge of the
Rose and Cross in union comes to us from Simon Studion
it brings with it an irresistible inference—but apart
from any direct evidence—that it was suggested to his
mind by the arms of Luther. Beyond doubt he dreamed,
speculated and theosophised thereon, but the fact remains
that there was no other antecedent source from which
he could have drawn his symbol. On the other hand, it is
not less certain that at an early period of Rosicrucian
literature and history the symbol was changed over and
became a Calvary Cross, emblazoned with a Rose of five
petals at the meeting-point of the arms. By a process of
exhaustion it is to be inferred that Robert Fludd was the
author of this conversion, because he is the sole extant
witness who describes the Order-symbol, awaiting that
time when the authors of the Srcrer Symsots at the close
of the eighteenth century presented the emblem pictorially,
and they followed Robert Fludd—as John Heydon had
done previously in England. Rose-Croix Masonry had
taken a lesson from him also some thirty years previously.
It should be noted in this connection that the allegations
of Michael Maier are not concerned with the Rosicrucian
symbol but with the style and title of the Order. As there
is no suggestion at his period that the members wore jewels
or badges, it may not have entered into his thought that
any symbol was implied. Outside perhaps Naomerria it
is mentioned nowhere in the early documents, and Maier
had passed from earthly life when Joachim Fritz testified
in Summum Bonum on the part of Robert Fludd.

112

-- Page 140 --
CHAPTER V
FAMA FRATERNITATIS R ..C..
Ir has been shewn that for any vestige of Rosicrucian
history and symbolism at the dawn of the seventeenth
century we depend upon the fact of a document which
has been described by at least four writers who unquestion-
ably had it in their hands. The most extended account
is anonymous, though the author may have been identical
with Petersen, whose name transpires as editor of the
Wiirtemberg Repertorrum Lirerarium. About the loca-
tion of this document—so long uncertain, so long, it would
seem unsought by those who speculate about the Rosy
Cross, and even now uncatalogued—we have at length
obtained a settlement. Behind it lies the convocation
of a Miuiria Crucirera Evancetica, which has been
called an assembly of Rosicrucians by various fools
of research, who find anything that they want among
the dubious memorials of the past. The more dubious
apparently, the better is their purpose served. ‘There is
not the least reason to suppose that the Militia was other
than a sect of Second Adventists, whose connection with
the occult reveries and Paracelsian atmosphere of NAOMETRIA
is borne out by no evidence. The all-important fact
‘s not, however, the Militia, but the Studion document.
[ have summarised fully the extant descriptions and there
seems no question—broadly speaking—that we can accept
their evidence implicitly in respect of spirit and content.
{t follows in this case that Simon Studion made use of
I 113

-- Page 141 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
symbolism in which there was effected possibly a conjunction
of the Rose and Cross. The casual reference to Tobias Hess
by C. G. von Murr seems also to indicate a fact, and this is
borne out by J. V. Andrez’s allusion to Naometrta in his
Latin memorial. It is certain, moreover, that prior to
1614 the peculiar set of notions and the prevailing atmo-
sphere which characterised Rosicrucian documents are to
be found in the writings of Valentin Weigel and Atgidius
Gutmann.

We are now on the threshold of the time when official
publications of the Rosicrucian Society began to appear in
Germany, whether it was actually incorporated or had
been devised by a few persons as what is termed an experi-
ment on the mind of the age. The Fama Frarerniratis
was first printed probably in 1614,} but the bibliographical

1 Professor John Ferguson states—Bretiorueca Cuemica, 2 vols., 1906,
Vol. I, p. 27—that the Universan RerormaTIon was printed at Cassel by
Wilhelm Wessell in 1612, together with the Fama Frarerniratis and
Haselmeyer’s Resronsro, in small 8vo, pp. 147. Compare Dr. Begemann:
CoMENIUSMONATSHEFTE, 1899, p. 165. Ferguson says also that another
edition was printed in 1614, with an Epistota added. This was in sm. 8vo,
pp-152. Thereseems to bea mistake here. Kloss, the German bibliographer
of Freemasonry, knows nothing of a 1612 edition, though it would help to
explain a letter cited by Lenglet du Fresnoy as appearing in 1613 and also
the testimony of Haselmeyer, if his possession of a manuscript version
were not otherwise certain. In THe Rosicrucians, by H. C. and K.
M. B., it is said that the Fama Frarernitatis was originally a Latin
pamphlet of 33 pages, implying that it appeared by itself. As usual
the authority for the statement does not emerge, and it is contrary
to all bibliographical records. Du Fresnoy mentions Communis &T
Generals REFORMATIO TOTIVS MUNDI, ET FaMA FraTERNITATIS ORDINIS
pE Rosza-Cruce, in 8vo. Casseliis, 1614. There is obviously no reason
why the manifesto should not have appeared originally in Latin like
the Conrzssio. Kloss catalogues (1) ALLGEMEINE UND Genera REFoRMA-
TION DER GANZEN WEITEN Wext. Beneben der Fama FRaTERNITATIS des
Léblichen Ordens des Rosenkreuzes an alle Gelehrte und Haupter Europa
geschrieben, Auch einer Kurtzen Responsion von dem Herrn HaseLMEYER
gestellt, etc. Cassel, 1614. (2) Fama Frareanitatis R..C.. . . . Benebst
derselben Lateinischen Conrussion, welche vorhin in Druck noch nie ausge-
gangen, nubnmebr aber auff vielfaltiges anfragen, zusampt deren beygefigten
Teutschen version. Cassel, 1615. (3) Fama Frarernivatis R., C, Beneben

II4

-- Page 142 --
Fama Fraternitatis R.*.C.".

side of early Rosicrucian literature is full of pitfalls, and
we shall see later on that the question is complicated, not
alone by the errors of bibliographers and the conflicting
statements of writers who did not know their subject! but
by the fact that one important subsidiary text is introduced
by a preface which is dated some years prior to the actual
time of publication. As regards the Fama it is known to
have been issued originally accompanied by a reply thereto
on the part of Adam Haselmeyer, who has been described as
notary public of the Archduke Maximilian and subsequently
as Imperial Judge in ordinary. He bears witness that he
saw and read the Fama Frarerniratis in the year 1610,
when residing at la Croix, a small village near Hal, in the
der Conression oder Bekanntnuss derselben Fraternttat, an alle Gelehrte und
Haupter in Europa geschrieben, etc. Frankfurt am Mayn, 1615. Among other
editions the British Museum has Fama Frarernitatis oft Ontdeckinge van
het Broederschap des loflijcken Ordens des Roosen-Cruyces. Followed by the
Conressie van der Broederschap des Roosen-Cruyces ; Antwoordt van Avam
Haseumeyer; Send-brief Aen de Christelijcke Broderen van den Roosen-
Cruyces ; Discours van de alghemeyne Reformatie des ganschen wereldts. Sine
loco, 1615. A Dutch edition. There has been cited also Fama FRATERNITATIS
eT Conressio Frarrum Rose Crucis. Ratisbon, 1614. It would not follow
that the text itself was in Latin, though the title was in that language, but
I think that this edition is mythical. In 1615 the Fama FRaTernirvAatis
appeared at Marburg, ohne die Reformation, as the title says. It should be
added that my information is at second hand and that no copy seems extant.
The Communis er GENnERALIS Rerormatio would seem also to have been
issued by itself in 1614, but at what place 1am unaware. A complete biblio-
graphy is beyond the pretensions of the present note. A Frankfort edition
of the Fama appeared in 1617, together with the Conressio, the SENDBRIEFF
of Julianus de Campis and a Farrurun History of an unknown Brother of
the Order of the R..C.". It has been suggested that the Fama of this edition
has been largely rewritten, but according to its title-page the text and that
of the Conressto are only purged from errors and restored to their genuine
sense. There is no question that this connotes important alterations.
Finally, the Fama and Conressio appeared at Dantzic in 1618.

1 There is, for example, the statement of Claude Jannet that the first
work relating to the Rosicrucians appeared at Venice in 1612 or 1613, no
title being given. On the authority of an obscure writer named Whytehed,
concerning whom no details are given, he affirms that the Fama FraTerni-
tatis belongs to the year 1615—which is manifestly contrary to fact—and
that its author was a citizen of Hamburg, named Jung—presumably Joachim

115

-- Page 143 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

Tyrol. He seems to have been drawn towards the Order
because he regarded it as a school of Paracelsus. There is
no question that he was a personality of the period, and
according to Semler he was a Knight of the Holy Cross.
The only difficulty respecting his testimony at the date
in question is that it is practically borne by one witness
only, unless we are willing to accept that of Julius Sperber
—writing in 1615—who says that what is stated in the
Fama was known otherwise for over nineteen years
before it was first printed.2 Among the letters cited
Junge, of whom we have heard previously. Solomon Semler himself, though
a patient and laborious investigator, contrived to create unawares numerous
pitfalls of erudition in addition to those which opened naturally in the
middle night of his subject. He says that between the years 1612 and 1615
the first writings bearing the name of Fraternitas Crucis Rosacee were
printed several times in different languages and sent to all Europe. But the
last point is the testimony of Fama FrareRwirvaTis on its own part, and it is
not borne out by fact. I suppose that I need not mention seriously Tue
Tueosopuist—Vol. I, No. 5, February, 1880—which has an article on the
Brethren of the Rosy Cross, by Alexander Wilder, M.D., described as
Vice-President of the Theosophical Society-——presumably in America. After
a characteristic rhodomontade on blasphemy, iniquity and persecution, he
proposes that a Discovery or THE HonourasBie Orpver or THE Rosy Cross
appeared in 1604, the result being war and massacre for thirty years.
He belongs to that obscure Borderland where mendacity and mania
meet,

1 He is said by Sédir—on I know not what authority—to have suspected
the hand of Jesuitry in the Order. The Responsion of Haselmeyer was
printed by itself in 1612 and is attached to most editions of Fama Frarer-
nitatis. As regards Sédir, see Hisrorre prs Rosr-Croix, p. 51.

2 The statement occurs in that ante-dated preface to which I have
referred already, and it introduces a famous tract called Ecuo Fraternitatis,
to which I shall recur later. Publication took place anonymously and the
authorship is not certain. Under the name of Julius Sperberus, Lenglet du
Fresnoy catalogues otherwise two works having an identical title-in-chief
with variant sub-titles, but they are really successive editions of the same
tract, dated respectively 1672 and 1674. In 1728-32 it was translated
from Latin into German by Friedrich Roth-Saholtz in Drutscurs THEATRUM
Cuemicum, Vol. IT, and appeared as Isacoce das ist Einleitung zur wabren
Erkanntniss des drey-einigen Gottes und der Natur; worinn auch viele
vorirefliche Dinge von der Materia des philosophischen Steins und dessen gat
wunderbaren Gebrauch enthalten sind. Aus dem lateinischen ins deutsche
iibersetzet, p. 1igetseg. The Latin titles were Isacoce, in veram Triunius Det

116

-- Page 144 --
Fama Fraternitatis R.*.C.".

by Bithle there is one also by 1..B..P .., which states
that the writer had seen the manifesto in question on
June 28, 1613, his own communication being dated January
2, 1614.1

I have said that the Responsio of Haselmeyer appears
as a supplement to the first traceable printed edition of
Fama Frarerniratis, and the latter is preceded by a tract
longer than itself, entitled An Universat RerorMaTION
oF THE Wuote Wipe Wor tp, which was accepted at the
beginning as an official document of the Brotherhood.
As a fact, it offers us spontaneously an useful criterion of
distinction between the essential and accidental connection
of works that pass as Rosicrucian. The mode of publica-
tion adopted was calculated to deceive at the period, and
people were deceived accordingly, especially aspirants to
the Order, and that considerable class which was prepared
to find alchemy anywhere. In the case under notice they
saw it to some purpose by writing Hermetic commentaries
thereon.

However, in the year 1618, when Michael Maier published

a treatise concerning the Laws of the Brotherhood, he
explains that the Communis ET GENERALIS ReFORMATIO was
not a Rosicrucian manifesto but a work translated from the
Italian which the booksellers bound up with the Fama,
as would seem to have been their frequent practice where
small pamphlets were concerned. We shall see that some-
thing of the same kind happened in respect of the Conressio,
though it may not have been a bookseller’s device. In this
et nature cognitionem, 1672, and Isacocr, de materia Lapidis Philosophici,
ejusque usu, 1674.

1 The title given by Bithle is SenpscurerBen AN Die CHRISTLICHE BRUDER
won Rosencreutz. J do not know whether this writer is identical with
J. B. P., described as a physician writing from the Kingdom of Bohemia on
fune 12, 1614, and expressing the desire to become a member, of the Order.
But see Chapter IX of the present work for a fuller account of the testimony
dorne by the Ecno.

117

-- Page 145 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
manner it transpired presently that the author of the
Reformation tract was Trajano Boccalini, an Italian
satirist of inconvenient opinions who was broken on the
wheel in 1613.7 It is conspicuously misplaced as preceding
and apparently introducing the concise history of a Secret
Society which had proposed ex Aypothesi to effect a reform
in science and art, if not also in religion, for it is a general
and entertaining travesty of reformation schemes. It
claims to have been issued by the Seven Wise Men of
Greece, acting under orders of the god Apollo, to whom
the Emperor Justinian had presented a plea for the pro-
mulgation of a new law against suicide, which his deposition
affirmed to be on the increase. Apollo took pains to inform
himself respecting the position of affairs in the world, and
made such lamentable discoveries that he charged the
Seven Wise Men, assisted by other terati, to produce
a scheme. They gathered together in conclave and the
tract furnishes a report of their debate at large, which took
place in the Delphic Palace and may be summarised under
the following heads.

(1) Hidden vices and perfidy in the cloak of simplicity
being palmary causes of corruption, it was proposed by
Thales that a window should be placed in the breasts of all
human beings, exposing the heart and its workings and
making concealment impossible. ‘This scheme was aban-
doned ultimately because it would deform the microcosm.
(z) Solon considered that disparity of means and the
custom of meum and tuum accounted for hatred, envy and

1 GrenERALE Rirorma dell’ Universo dai sette Savit della Grecia e da altri
Litterati, publicata di ordine di Apollo, being Advertisement No. 77 of
Boccalini’s Raccuactt pt Parwasso, Centuria Prima, 1612. There were two
Centuries in all, and they were thrice translated into English—by the Earl of
Monmouth in 1656 and anonymously in 1704 and 1706, The ignorance of
Kieswetter is exhibited by his statement that J. V. Andree wrote the
Unriversan Rerormation, the mendacious bibliographer of fraudulent of
imaginary documents being unaware that whoever put this satire into
German only translated from the Italian,

118

-- Page 146 --
Fama Fraternitatis R.*.C.".
all uncharitableness, while an equal division of goods would
remove prevailing disorders; but this opinion was set
aside because fools would receive too much and the wise
too little. (3) Chilo suggested the perpetual banishment
of gold and silver ; but it was pointed out that they would
be replaced by substitutes. (4) Cleobulus appealed for
the extradition of iron because it was maliciously applied
to the forging of swords, instead of ploughshares; but
it was agreed that force would be necessary to effect such
a reformation, involving weapons of destruction and defen-
sive armour, so that iron would be used to procure its own
banishment and maintain its exile, or in other words, it
would not be banished at all. (5) Pittacus appealed for
the reservation of supreme dignities to those who sought
them by the path of desert and under the guidance of
virtue ; but (6) Periander pointed out that these dignities
were not conferred by princes on able and deserving men.
(7) Bias regarded the evils and disorders of the times as
materially referable to the fact that people were not content
to live in their own countries, but were ever—as individuals
and nations—exceeding their allotted bounds. The remedy
of present disorders was to return every man forthwith to
his native land and destroy thereafter all modes of com-
munication between country and country. This having
been rejected because the enmity of nation towards nation
was due to the ambition of princes and not to national
causes, while travel was necessary for those who would
attain wisdom, (8) Cleobulus intervened a second time,
demanding that the proposed reformation should be
limited to the compensation of the good and the punish-
ment of evil persons, since it was obvious that previous
schemes were sophistic and chimerical fancies. (9) This
enraged Thales, who demanded a canon of distinction as
to those who were perfectly good and utterly evil, with
another for the separation of counterfeits. (10) Periander
11g

-- Page 147 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
affirmed that ambition and usurpation on the part of
princes have filled the world with hatred and transformed
human beings into beasts of prey. ‘Their ambitious lust
must be bridled and the extent of their principalities
limited, since no overgrown kingdom could be ruled with
care and justice. (11) Solon opposed this because it was
too late in the day to root up so old an evil, while they
were called to consider the disorders of private men and
not those of princes. The faults of rulers should be
corrected by the godly lives of their subjects. (12) The
commendation which this speech elicited meant anything
but practical assent, and thereafter Cato rose up, with
much praise in his mouth for all the previous speakers,
but so far the field of debate was rather for those who are
acute in the diagnosis of disease than for those who prepare
a medicine. He affirmed that the maladies which molested
the age were like the stars of heaven in number and adjudged
the case desperate. ‘There was no cure possible except
by another deluge, in expectation of which there should
be built a new ark for the salvation of boys not above
twelve years old, women being utterly destroyed, leaving
only their unhappy memory and kind heaven being adjured
to grant men the power of procreation, like bees and beetles,
without the female sex. (13) The discourse of Cato was
hated by the whole assembly, which prayed earnestly to
be saved, alike from cataracts of heaven and the loss of
womankind. Seneca came forward to deprecate extremes
and violence but regarded all the schemes of reformation
as paths travelled in darkness, for it was obvious that the
assembled literati might be qualified by acquaintance to
deal with the evils and vices which were common in their
own class, but they were neither safe guides nor doctors
for those of other walks in life. Persons of probity and
worth should be told off therefrom to correct and purify
the other trades and professions, in which manner there

120

-- Page 148 --
Fama Fraternitatis R.*.C.".
might be produced a reform worthy of the present deputa-
tion and of existing needs. (14) This proposal fared worse
than Cato’s because of its reflection on themselves and the
dishonour which it did to Apollo, who had deemed them
sufficient for the business. Seeing that he was only a novice,
there was little hope to be placed in Mazzoni, but he spoke
out unabashed and brought the subject in hand to a focus-
point. The business was to cure the present Age of its
many and foul infirmities; they must therefore examine
the Age in corpore vile. (15) The proposition was acclaimed
by all; the Age was commanded into the presence of the
Reformers and was brought in a chair to the Delphic
Palace by the Four Seasons. He was stripped of the gay
vestures which concealed his real condition and was found
to be encrusted beneath with a thick scurf of appearances,
which had moreover eaten into the bones, so that in all the
huge colossus there was not an inch of healthy flesh. Struck
with horror and despair, they huddled on his garments
and dismissed him. (16) Convinced that the disease of
the time was indeed past cure, they shut themselves up and
resolved to provide for their own reputations, to which end
they prepared a manifesto, testifying to the solicitude of
Apollo in respect of his faithful terati, and their own
pains in compiling this General Reformation. Descending
thence to particulars, they fixed the prices of sprats,
cabbages and pumpkins, adding—at the request of Thales
—a caution respecting false measures in the sale of peas and
cherries. (17) The gates of the Palace were thrown open,
the General Reformation was read to the people assembled
in the market-place and was so ardently applauded that all
Parnassus rang with shouts of joy. From this the author
‘concludes that the rabble are satisfied with trifles, while
men of judgment know that wztia erunt donec homines and
ithat the height of wisdom lies in the discretion of those
who are content to leave the world as they find it.
121

-- Page 149 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

A very curious commentary in advance, lampoon and
judgment by satire, on the pretensions of the Fama
FRATERNITATIS is this derisive pronouncement on the general
advisability of letting ill alone, since it may be made worse
by the meddling. It has been worth while to summarise
it, that we may appreciate its complete distinction from
the text which follows and estimate the intelligence of
a bookseller who married such irreconcilables together.t
For in the Fama Frarernitatis the “‘ Most Laudable
Order of the Rosy Cross” (1) makes boast of the happy
time—namely, that present age—in which all things hidden
heretofore are being manifested and made known; (2)
certifies that men are raised up, endued with great wisdom
for the renewal of all arts, their exaltation and perfection ;
(3) looks to the realisation by man of his own worth and
nobility, and of the measure of his knowledge in Nature ;
(4) cites “the most godly and highly illuminated Father,
our Brother C ~R-=.C..,” the “ chief and original of our
Fraternity,” as one who laboured long in view of a General
Reformation ; (5) affirms that a Reformation is to come,
that Europe is with child, that it will bring forth a strong
child, and that a door shall open—as “ already is expected
by many with great desire’; (6) distinguishes the matter
of reform into things human and divine; and finally
(7) regards it as fitting that before the Sun uprises an Aurora
should break forth, or some clear light in the sky—meaning
the manifestation of the Brotherhood, as of those who have

1 A few hostile writers of the past have regarded the Rosicrucian
manifestoes as jeux d’esprit, mere hoaxes and camouflage. Had the notion
come into their minds, they might have argued that the Communis ET
Generatis RerorMatio was joined to Fama Frarerniratis not by 4
publisher’s blunder but as a derisive challenge to the stupidity of the
German mind. It did not so occur, and it is time—for the rest—to abandon
the hoax hypothesis, which—in so far as it has any basis—rests only on
alleged hedgings and insincerity of J. V. Andrea, as we shall ascertain in the
proper place,

122

-- Page 150 --
Fama Fraternitats R.°.C.".
made themselves ready against the coming of the New Age
and hold the keys thereof.

The story of the Fama Fraternitatis is that of the
mythical founder of the Rosy Cross and of the circum-
stances under which the Order came—by its hypothesis—
into being. A mythical personality implies a mythical
foundation, in the sense that it is falsified historically.
The Legend of the Rosy Cross is in rigorous analogy with
the Masonic Legend of Hiram Abiff, and the respective
institutions are accounted for in both cases by invention
instead of by history. The position of the Fama, as regards
the world and its learning, at the period? to which it
is referable, locates it at once as belonging—somewhat
late in the day—to the old encampment of revolt against
Aristotle and Galen. It is at issue not only with the schools
which held from these masters but with men of learning
in general, because of their pride and covetousness. They
are as a house divided against itself, but in union they might
develop a perfect method of all the Arts. In respect of
religion it allows that “ the Church has been cleansed ” 3

1 Tue Rosicrucians, by H. C. and K. M. B., describes the founder as
sent forth with the warrants of a messenger by what is called the Grand,
otherwise the Great White Lodge, a statement fully in accordance with the
common habit of theosophists in presenting what they would regard as
evidence.

® It was the eve of the Thirty Years’ War—i.e. 1618-48.

® In the year t900 Dr. W. Wynn Westcott published a pamphlet entitled
A Snort History or tux Soc. Rosie. (sic, ie. Socreras RostcructaNa) IN
Anetta, which contains several notable errors. It is affirmed, for example,
that “if there is one thing clear it is that in the Fama there is no reference to
the Reformed Church, while in the Conressio the whole tone is Lutheran.”
Hence it is inferred that the author of the one tract was not responsible for
the other, and that presumably between the two there was precisely that
lapse of time which must separate a pre-Reformation document from one
that contrasted Lutheran views “ with those of Roman Catholicism.” It is
said that this point has been missed by all writers. The answer is that
Dr. Westcott—although a Supreme Magus of the so-called Rosicrucian
Society—had failed to read the Fama. What are the affirmations on the
subject made therein? In addition to the clear statement quoted in my

123

-- Page 151 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
and'affirms that the Order confesses Jesus Christ, according
to the faith maintained at that time in Germany and certain
other countries. It makes use of two Sacraments, as in-
stituted “ with all forms and ceremonies of the first and
renewed Church.” In political matters it acknowledges
“the Roman Empire and Quarta Monarchia for our
Christian head,” though it knows that there are alterations
to come.

On the subject of occult science and philosophy it is
to be inferred from the text at large that the Fraternity
was versed—by its claim—in Higher Magia, pure Kabalism
and a hidden art of healing.t Moreover, it had the secret
of transmuting metals, and this is asserted expressly, though
the text states that true philosophers—among whom they
are presumably to be included—esteem little the making of
gold, “‘ for besides that they have a thousand better things.”
text above,{they may be taken out as follows: (1) That “in these latter
days ”—or, when the document was written—God was pouring out His
mercy and goodness so richly that the faithful were attaining “‘ more and
more to the perfect knowledge of His Son Jesus Christ and of Nature,”
whence the putative Dark Ages were over. (2) That Christian Rosy Cross
returned from the East with a process for amending the Church. (3) That
the world in those days was already ‘“ big with commotions” and was
lringing forth worthy men—e.g. Paracelsus—‘ who broke with all force
through darkness and barbarism.” (4) That “if our Brethren and Fathers
had lived in this our present clear light, they would more roughly have
handled the Pope, Mahomet, scribes, artists and sophisters, and would have
shewn themselves more helpful, not simply with sighs and wishing of their
end and consummation.” (5) That in respect of the religion professed by
the Brethren, it was that which I have cited in my text—namely, Lutheran
or Protestant, as proved by the “ use ” of two sacraments only. These are
gleanings made from a small pamphlet, not from a considerable treatise, in
which it might seem excusable for an undiscerning criticism to miss
important points. The congregatio omnium stultorum—otherwise the “ Soc.
Ros.”—whom Dr. Westcott addressed in his pamphlet, were unqualified to
correct their Magus, and this monument remains therefore, an unchallenged
memorial in their archives. It should be added that the Fama stultifies its
own chronology by making C-.Rs.Cy a contemporary of Paracelsus.

* Kieswetter speaks of “ magico-magnetic healing ” as one of the chief
studies of original Rosicrucians, as if the Fama FRaTERNITATIS were a post~
Mesmer document. The expression was unknown at the period.

124

-- Page 152 --
Fama Fraternitatis R.*.C.".

They do not rejoice therein, but rather—in the words of
Christ—that they behold the Heavens open, the angels
of God ascending and descending, and their own names
written in the Book of Life. It is testified also that “‘ under
the name of Chemia many books and pictures ”—meaning
the symbolical designs which figure in the textbooks of
Hermetic literature—“ are set forth in contumeliam gloria
Dei.” Jt is prayed that all learned men will take warning
against them, “for the enemy never resteth, but soweth
his weeds till a stronger one doth root them out.” Else-
where it is said plainly that “‘ we promise more gold than
both the Indies bring to the King of Spain.” The Order
had therefore the Medicine of metals—as it is called in
alchemy—but as regards that of men, even the early
Brethren, who lived in the light of their founder, could
not “ pass their time appointed of God,” though they were
free from all diseases. Finally, they could behold, “ the
image and pattern of all the world,” as discovered to them
by one of their secret books ; but they had no glass which
shewed to them their future misfortunes or their hour of
death, the latter in particular being known only to God,
“Who would have us keep in continual readiness.” Astrol-
ogy was not included therefore among their keys of
science.?

Though qualified in this manner, the claims advanced
on behalf of the Order were considerable enough within
the measures of occult adeptship, at the time when the
Fama was published. ‘The root of all was in certain written
memorials, which were a heritage from the past. We hear
of (1) THe Boox M -., which does not seem to have been

1 The position of the Fama on the subjects of alchemy and astrology is of
a certain importance, in view of later Rosicrucian developments. It puts
‘open a door for the spiritual understanding of the Hermetic work on metals
which was adopted by Fludd prior to 1630, and it does not exclude what may
be termed a national astrology—or the witness of the heavens to coming
events and epochs in human history at large.

125

-- Page 153 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
identical with (2) Rota Munpr; (3) THe Boox T..3;
(4) Proteus; (5) Certain Axromata; (6) Tue Boox H..;
and (7) A Philosophical BrstioTHEca, which seems to have
included an account of the first Brethren. These things
notwithstanding, it was not known certainly whether the
second line of adeptship, according to the succession of
time, were of the same wisdom as the first and whether
“they were admitted to all things.” The deponents
of the Fama were of the third line, as the text states
explicitly, and as would follow otherwise in the logic of
the case.

That “ high-illuminated man of God,” Christian Rosy
Cross, “ the chief and original of our Fraternity,” (1) had
learned the lore of the East and was (2) in possession of
“true and infallible” Axtomata, “out of all faculties,
sciences and arts,” directing to the middle point and centre,
for the restoration of all things ; (3) he had also the art of
transmutation ; and (4) acquaintance with the Elementary
Dwellers—i.e. Elementary Spirits—‘ who revealed unto
him many of their secrets.” The manner in which he
attained this occult knowledge constitutes the Legend of
the Fama and the traditional history concerning the Rosy
Cross. It is said of him that he was descended of noble
parents, or, in the words of a Latin Elogium purporting
to be inscribed at the end of the Boox T, ex nobili atque
Splendida Germanie R..C-. familia oriundus. It would
appear to have fallen upon evil times, and in the fifth year
of his age he was placed in a cloister because of his poverty.
There he learned Latin and Greek,? and “ being yet in his
growing years” accompanied one of the monks on a

1 Kieswetter claims to be in possession of a Boox T ..—namely, TstA-
MEeNTUM Fratrum Rosem et Aure® Crucis.

> By the hypothesis of Conressio Frarerniratis, C..R..C.". was
born in the second half of the fourteenth century, or at a time when
the monasteries where it was possible to learn Greek were few and far
between.

126

-- Page 154 --
Fama Fraternitatis R.*.C.".
journey to the Holy Land. This monk died at Cyprus,
and though not possessing as yet the purse of Fortunatus,
C..R..C.. decided to continue his pilgrimage alone.
With such object in view, he shipped himself over to Damas-
cus, from which he proposed to reach Jerusalem. He
remained, however, at Damascus, owing to “ the feebleness
of his body.” Whether he was able or not to heal himself,
he obtained “ much favour with the Turks” by his skill
in physic. Meanwhile a report reached him concerning
(1) the Wise Men of Damcar,? in Arabia; (2) the wonders
which they wrought ; and (3) “ how Nature was discovered
unto them.” The hope of reaching the Holy City now
faded from his mind, and—being unable to “ bridle his
desires ’’—he “ made a bargain with the Arabians that they
should carry him for a certain sum of money * to Damear.”
Notwithstanding his “debility of body,” he was “ of
a strong Dutch constitution” and though only sixteen
years old he accomplished this adventure happily. The
Wise Men welcomed and received him, not indeed as a

1 According to Westcott, C .R ..C .. left Europe “ with a member of a
Christian Fraternity,” thus suggesting that he was taken East by an initiate.
‘The original says that he “‘ was associated to a Brother P .A..L..” This
‘was of course a monastic brother, and the pair were on a pious
pilgrimage.

2 A Rosicrucian secret Ritual of the nineteenth century affirms that
Damcear is a Hebrew word, signifying Blood of the Lamb—i.e. p= Blood
and 4>=Lamb. In Talmudic Hebrew 4~5 denotes an ass and therefore
the alleged signification might be as reasonably Blood of the Ass. Damcar
is an invented name for a fabulous city and there is not the least reason to
suppose that it has any derivation at all, while that which is offered is in no
relation to the city or to anything that is said concerning it. The name
seems later to have been regarded as a misprint for Damas, meaning
Damascus, which, obviously, stultifies the story.

8 After the common manner of the old romances, a fairy-gifted hero is
orovided with funds invariably, no one knows whence or how. Possibly
2..R..C.. earned fees by his “ skill in physic.”

4 According to Westcott, he visited “the Sanctuary of Mount Carmel
where he studied with the wise men,” a peculiarly gratuitous substitution
‘or the mythical Damcar, presented, however, as if there were no question
on the subject, or as if the authority of the Fama were behind it.

127

-- Page 155 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
stranger but as one whom they had long expected; and
in this Hidden City of Adeptship (1) he improved his
knowledge of Arabic, (z) translated the Boox M.. into
“ good Latin,” and (3) learned “‘ his physic and his mathe-
matics.” 1 At the end of three years he “ shipped himself
over Sinus Arabicus into Egypt, carrying the Boox M..;
but it was only for a flying visit, during which he noted
“the plants and creatures.” Afterwards he sailed the
Mediterranean Sea and arrived at Fez, as directed by the
men of Damcar, and there apparently he was taught how
to communicate with Elementary Spirits. Though he
learned their secrets—as we have seen otherwise—it is
not perhaps surprising that in the opinion of C..R..C..
the Magia and Kabalah practised by the people of Fez
“was defiled with their religion,” which notwithstanding
he was able to adapt them, so that they served his purpose.
He stayed for two years in Fez and then “ sailed with many
costly things into Spain,” hoping that the learned in
Europe would meet him with open arms and “ order all
their studies according to those sure and sound foundations”
which he had reached in his travels. But the literati of
Spain and also of other nations would have none of his
new philosophy, his “sure and infallible Axiomata,” or
his reform of the arts and sciences. They had too much
business in hand.

C.R.C-. is said to have loved Germany, for which
reason he betook himself to his native land, where he
erected a “neat and fitting habitation,” and “ ruminated
on his voyage and philosophy,” reducing them into a

1 Not-—as Dr. Westcott suggests—“ the old philosophies of Alexandria,
and the Hebrew Kabalah, and the remains of the ancient Egyptian
Mysteries.” ‘That is the suggestio falst which abounds in the records of the
Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia, and in records of kindred dreamers.

*C.R..C.. came back like Noah in an ark, with growths and fruits
and beasts, as if his proposition was to found a herbarium and zoological
gardens.

128

-- Page 156 --
Fama Fraternitatis R.*.C.".
true memorial.! He is said also to have made many instru-
ments—ex omnibus hujus artis partibus—but few of them had
come into the hands of the third line of succession. In
this manner some five years passed away, and as will happen
to adepti—so placed in a solitude—he began to “‘ remember
of this unstable world ” and his desired reformation. He
had been read a severe lesson, and it appears to have been
a little in dejection that he decided to resume his work.
This time, however, he set out from a different basis
and selected three monks or friars from his ancient cloister,
whom he bound to himself in fidelity, diligence and secrecy.
Their business was to write as he might dictate or direct
for the benefit of those who were to come. “After this
manner,” says the Fama, “ began the Fraternity of the
Rosy Cross, at first by four persons only, and by them was
made the magical language and writing ”—presumably
meaning a cipher—‘as well as a large dictionary which
we yet use daily to God’s praise and glory, and find great
wisdom therein.” With the inevitable stultification of
itself which characterises this kind of document, they made
also the first part of the Boox M.—which had been com-
piled long ago in Arabia, had been translated by C «.R -.C -.
and carried by him to Europe.* It proved notwithstanding
a heavy labour, while, albeit there were four only, abiding
n secret, an “ unspeakable concourse of the sick hindered
chem.” Finally, C -.R ..C -. had been occupied in erecting
* Compare De Quincey: Hisrorico-Carrican Inquiry INTO THE
JRIGIN OF THE Rosrcructans AND THE FREEMASONS. LONDON Macazine,
7ol. IX, Jan. to June, 1824. After his travels C..R..C... is said to have
‘established himself in a grotto of his native country.” See also William
Turd, D.D. : Universan History or tue Reiicrovs Rrres, CEREMONIES AND
YUSTOMS or THE Wuoxe Wortp, pp. 699-701, circa 1794. The grotto story
<curs herein, probably for the first time.
2 The Boox M... has been identified with Minutus Mundus, about which
‘e shall hear shortly, but the latter is distinguished expressly from certain
HSS. of the Order, as if it might be an arcane instrument rather than a
witten volume.
K 129

-- Page 157 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

a Domus Spiritus Sancti.1 It came about therefore that
when the last undertaking had been brought to a successful
completion “ they concluded to draw yet others into the
Fraternity,” making eight together in all. They were
“ bachelors and of vowed virginity, by whom was collected
a book containing whatsoever can be desired or hoped for
by man.” In other words, the textual part of the scheme
was at length finished, after which—as agreed, it is said,
at the beginning—they separated into several countries,
that their Axiomata might be examined by the learned in
secret. Five of the Brethren departed and two remained
with the Founder ; but in accordance with another under-
taking, they gathered each year together “‘ and made a full
resolution of that which they had done.”

It came about in the course of the years that one of the
travelling Brethren died in England, and this caused

1 According to Kieswetter, the House of the Holy Spirit was probably
situated somewhere in Southern Germany. The suggestion is of course
rubbish, an invention without areason. More serious writers have discovered
to their own satisfaction its analogy with a mysterious building erected at
Cairo, our knowledge of which is clouded by myth and fable. It is
said that Hugo of Caesarea and Geoffrey, a Knight Templar, visited Cairo
and the Sultan on Templar business. They were led by that potentate
himself to the Palace Kashef and taken through various courts of very rich
architecture, full of strange birds and beasts, and to an innermost chamber,
where the Sultan invoked the Unseen Master. The curtains of gold and
pearl were then drawn back suddenly, and they beheld that being seated
in unspeakable glory on a golden throne, encompassed by his chief officers.
This story is fathered on William of Tyre. An actual source of informa-
tion is Von Hammer, who says that a Secret Society was founded at Cairo in
the tenth century by a person named Abdallah, who divided it into seven
classes or degrees of knowledge. The last and highest of these taught the
vanity of religion and the indifference of all actions, because they were not
visited with punishment or crowned by reward, either here or hereafter.
The Society continued to exist and to develop its doctrines. In process of
time it divided into two branches, otherwise Karmathites and Ishmaelites,
the first of which was destroyed by fire and sword, for making war on the
caliphate. The second was content to pursue its designs in secret and one of
the members was placed at length on the throne of Egypt. After this piece
of signal statecraft, the Society erected at Cairo that great palace described
in this note and called it the House of Wisdom. It was provided with

130

-- Page 158 --
Fama Fraternitatis R.*.C.".
Christian Rosy Cross to call the rest of them together.
Ultimately he himself passed away, though those of the
third succession knew not when nor how, for a hundred
years and more had already elapsed.t There came, however,
a novice—the pupil of one who had died im Gallia Nar-
bonensi. Having taken “the solemn oath of fidelity and
secrecy,” he said that his spiritual father “ had comforted
him in telling that this Fraternity should ere long not
remain so hidden,” but should be helpful to the whole
German nation. He completed his novitiate, and being
then inclined to travel had been “ provided with the Purse
of Fortunatus.” But seeing that he was “a good architect”
—he proposed, before setting out, to alter and improve
“his building.” The intimation is curious because the
sequel shews that no tenement personal to himself is really
intended but a Hidden House of the Order, whether we
teachers, servitors, instruments and books. Von Hammer tells us that men
and women were admitted on equal terms, without fees of any kind, and
that the caliphs took part in the debates. I resume these points at their value,
but some of them look dubious, and dubious is also the statement that behind
this public institution there lay the mysteries of that Secret Order which has
been mentioned, developed by the process of time into nine grades and
unfolding finally the great arcanum of atheism, though it was political above
all in its objects. These included the permanent overthrow of the caliphate
race of the Abassides in favour of the Fatemite dynasty. There came a time
when the Society was itself broken up, but a resurrection took place under
the denomination of a New House of Science. C. W. King—in Tue
Gwostics AND THEIR Rematns—and George Soane—in New Curiositixs oF
Lrrerature—were both disposed to think that the College of Adeptship at
Damcar was borrowed or reflected from the House of Wisdem at Cairo.
It is not a very important question and may be dismissed as unproven. In
any case, it is not worth debating. I do not remember that the House of
Wisdom is supposed to have been the depository of a secret tradition
connected with the Higher Magia and Hermetic Mysteries. According to
the thesis of Von Hammer, it developed into the sect of Assassins, and I
question whether the writers of the Fama would intentionally have referred
their theosophy to such a source, whatever may have been known or
misknown concerning this sect at that period.

1 Vide Westcott: “In 1484 the Founder and Imperator C. R. died.”
“There was no such title as Imperator at that time in the Order, according to
the records.

131

-- Page 159 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
choose to understand it as that “ fitting and neat habita-
tion ” in which Christian Rosy Cross “ ruminated his voyage
and philosophy,” or the alleged “new building” which
was Domus Spiritus Sancti. In the course of his labours—
which were not pursued alone—he came upon a Memorial
‘Tablet, inscribed with the Roll of the Brotherhood, and
it was decided that this should be transferred to a more
appropriate place. But it was affixed to the wall by a
great staple, which had to be withdrawn forcibly and
brought with it “ an indifferent big stone.” A secret door
was uncovered partially in this manner, to the joy ‘of those
who were present, and when it was cleared completely
they found thereon, written in great letters :
Posr Centum Vicintr Annos Pareszo }

“with the year of the Lord under it,” but this is not given
in the text. The Operative Lodge of these Emblematic
Masons was then called off for the night, in order to consult
the Rota. Their work was resumed next morning, and it
came about that they opened the door, discovering a
Vault or Sanctuary of seven sides and seven angles, every
side of the width of five feet and eight feet in height. The
sun never shone therein, but it was enlightened by another
luminary in the middle place of the roof. On the floor was
a circular altar, covered with a plate of brass, variously
engraven as follows within concentric circles: (1) A-.G-.
R-.C.. (2) Hoc universi compendium unius mihi sepul-
crum fect. (3) Fesus mihi omnia. In the middle part of
the altar were four small circles enclosing figures and about
them the respective inscriptions: (1) Neguaquam Vacuum.
(2) Legis Fugum. (3) Libertas Evangelit. (4) Dei Gloria
Intacta.

Architecturally speaking, the interior of this Vault is

1 A Rosicrucian Ritual of circa 18go connects the 120 years with the
number of Princes whom Darius set over his people, which is symbolism in
a bankruptcy state as regards meaning.

132

-- Page 161 --
Fama Fraternitatis R.".C.".

not described intelligently : it is, however, an emblematic
story and in the secret circles has long since been rectified.
In the present place it is sufficient to say that each of the
seven walls was parted into squares, while each square
contained figures and sentences. There was a luminous
triangle in the ceiling and another—presumably dark—
on the ground or floor. In this latter were described “ the
power and rule of the Inferior Governors.” The seven
walls had seven doors, behind which chests were stored
containing (1) all our books; (2) the VocasuLarium of
Paracelsus, an [T1neRartum and Vita;} (3) looking-glasses
of ‘ divers virtues,” bells, burning lamps ; and (4) “ chiefly
wonderful artificial songs.”* In a word, everything was
so arranged that if in the years or the centuries “ the
Fraternity should come to nothing,” it might be restored
again by the contents of this Vault alone.

The text proceeds to state that they “had not yet seen the
body of our careful and wise father,” so they placed aside
the altar and raised up a plate of brass. In this manner they
came upon “a fair and worthy body, whole and uncon-
sumed,” clothed in ceremonial vestments and holding
that Boox TT’, “ which next to the Bible is our greatest
treasure.” Of this disinterment, which in better hands
might have passed into an important figurative mystery,
we find no further particulars. The narrative affirms

1 The Fama adds, “ whence this relation is taken for the most part.”
The Vocasurarium, Irrnegarium and Vira are of course imaginary texts.
According to Westcott, the two last were those of Christian Rosy Cross,
which is borne out by the Frankfurt edition of 1617 but not by earlier
texts.

2 Wynn Westcott makes the brilliant suggestion that the artificial songs
were mantras, Having regard to his views as an occultist on the occult
knowledge and science of the early Rosicrucians, I fail to understand why he
should shrink from proposing that they were really phonographic records, in
which case the mysterious Minutus Mundus might well be a phonograph
itself—a little world indeed, full of expatiation and tales of little meaning,
though occasionally “the words seem strong,” like the depositions of
Metropolitan Chapters of a “‘ Rosicrucian Society of Freemasons.”

133

-- Page 162 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

further that there was another and smaller altar—“ finer
than can be imagined by any understanding man,” and it
is said to have contained Minutrus Munpvs, not otherwise
described at the moment.! Elsewhere in the Vault there
were also some further books—which were made by one
of the sodality “instead of household care.”

As regards the Boox T ...?, it contained at the end thereof
the following

ELOGIUM :
Granum Pecrori Jesu INSITUM.

C..R..C.. ex nobili atque splendida Germania R..C-.
familia oriundus, vir sui seculi divinis revelationibus, sub-
tilissimis imaginationibus, indefessis laboribus ad ccelestia
atque humana mysteria, arcanave admissus postquam
suam (quam Arabico et Africano itineribus collegerat)
plus quam regiam, atque imperatoriam Gazam suo seculo
nondum convenientem, posteritati eruendam custodivisset
et jam suarum Artium, ut et nominis, fides ac conjunct-
issimos heredes instituisset, mundum minutum omnibus
motibus magno illi respondentem fabricasset hocque
tandem preteritarum, presentium et futurarum rerum
compendio extracto, centenario major, non morbo (quem
ipse nunquam corpore expertus erat, nunquam  alios
infestare sinebat) ullo pellente sed Spiritu Dei evocante,
illuminatam animam (inter Fratrum amplexus et ultima

1 There is no warrant for identifying it with the Book M.:., which
C..R..C.*. translated into good Latin, unless we elect to do so on the
ground that the latter was otherwise absent from the vault or sepulchre.
According to the ELocium which follows immediately, Minutus Mundus
was either a prophetic book or a divinatory instrument.

_* This has been explained as Torah, the Book of the Law, perhaps a
hidden understanding of Holy Scripture. The Hebrew word ispvin. In
such case it would connote an interpretation like that of Hgidius Gutmann
on Genesis. Another speculation has referred it to the ancient Tarot cards,
considered as a Book of Divination, but this is idle speculation. In 1620,
however, there appeared Liner T'.., id est, Portus Tranquillitatis ejus, to
which I shall refer later.

134

-- Page 163 --
Fama Fratern

oscula) fidelissimo Creatori D
simus, Frater suavissimus, Pre
tegerrimus, asuisad centum vig

Beneath this inscription ap
by way of signatures.

1. Fras. ]..A.. Fra, Ch..
2. Frav. Ge. Ve. M. P. G.
3. Fras. Fo.Re.C.e., Funr
4. Fra. Fe. Ba.M-. PLA
5. Fra-.G..G-. M. Pi. ¢

Secundi (¢
1. Fra... Po. Aw. Successor

2. Frav. Aw. Successor Fra
3. Fra..R.. Successor Pai
triumphan

Beneath these na
Ex Deo nascimur, in Fesu m
TEVIVI.
1 Tt will be seen that this notable i1
and those who have affirmed that the
work of J. V. Andree have produced
that their style is his style and their ]
confessing on my own part that it wou
the Exocium in reasonable translated
lish reader the heads of its instruction 1
C..R..C.. came from a noble and:
that name; (2) that on account of
labours he became acquainted with
of revelation; (3) that he collected
journeys to Arabia and Africa ; (4) th
his age but to posterity; (5) that |
faithful and closely joined ; (6) that he
to the great one in its movements ; (
past, present and to come; (8) that a
passed away at the call of the Holy
yielding his illuminated soul to its
beloved Father, a most kind Brother
Friend ; and (10) that he is hidden h
twenty years.

I

jtatis R.*.C.".
20 reddidisset, Pater dilectis-
ceptor fidelissimus, amicus in-

inti annos hic absconditus est.?
peared the following initials,

, electione Fraternitatis caput.

ir Heres 8. Spiritus.
. Pictor et Architectus.
abalista.

Yirculi
Fra. 1..0.., Mathematicus.
. PoD.~.

vis CRC .., cum Christo

tS.

mes was written:
orimur, per Spiritum Sanctum
scLMmUs.

scription constitutes a single sentence,
early Rosicrucian manifestoes are the
as part of their evidence an argument
uatin is his Latin. I leave it to them,
ld cost me considerable pains to express
form. But for the benefit of the Eng-
nay be scheduled briefly thus : (1) That
illustrious family of Germany bearing
his subtle conceptions and untiring
Divine and human mysteries by way

a royal and imperial treasure in his
at the same was serviceable not only to
e desired to have heirs of the name,
fabricated a little world corresponding
7) that it was a compendium of things
{ter living for more than a century he
Spirit and not by reason of disease,
faithful Creator; (9) that he was a
, a faithful Preceptor and an upright
ere from his own for one hundred and

35

-- Page 164 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
I have compared all available German and Dutch editions
with the English translation edited by Eugenius Philalethes,
but owing either to original typographical errors or other
reasons it is difficult or impossible to harmonise this Roll
with the initials of Brethren about whom we hear other-
wise. The original Brethren, taken out of his cloister! by
Christian Rosy Cross, were Fratres G-.V-., 1-.A-. and
T..0... The last died in England,? and—according to the
story—it was subsequently to this that the mausoleum was
erected, perhaps by the Founder himself, as intimated
by one of the Latin inscriptions. The next recruits of the
Order were R..C.., a first cousin of the founder, and
described on the Roll as F -.R-.C.., the “ younger heir of
the House of the Holy Spirit”; Frater F ..B ..,3 who signs,
however, as F ..B..M .., a skilful painter, according to the
text of the Fama, and Pictor et Architectus, according to
the Roll; Frater G..G.., signing as Cabalisia; and
Frater P-.D.., who was cancellarius, according to the
Fama, but does not appear in the document attached to
the Boox T.... These were the First Circle. In what
sense Frater C..H.. was caput electione Fraternitatis in the
lifetime of the founder and in a circle of eight persons
remains an open question, but he is implicitly excluded
from the First Circle by the text of the Fama. He was
not a chief appointed on the decease of Christian Rosy
Cross, because it is stated expressly in the Roll of the

1 It is obvious that this statement belongs to the region of romance, a
layman having no title to remove monks from their monastery.

* His death is said to have been foretold to him by Frater C.".—pre-
sumably Junior Heres—but unfortunately such prevision, as we have seen,
has been expressly denied to the Brotherhood in a previous part of the text.
I..0.*, is said to have earned fame in England “ because he cured a young
Earl of Norfolk of the leprosy.”

. We have seen that the Baconians have claimed this signature as repre-
senting Francis Bacon, ignoring (1) that according to the Boox T.”. he
signed as B. M. and (2) that the first circle were all Germans, except I.”.
A.*, whose nationality is not disclosed.

136

-- Page 165 --
Fama Fraternitatis R.*.C..
Second Circle that Frater R.. was successor to Father
CorReCot

It will be seen that as an historical memorial, the Fama
Fraternitatis is a confused and contradictory account.
It is indeed so gravely at fault in this respect that it looks
almost too bad to be regarded as a matter of invention:
one would have thought that the concealed artist must
have taken a little more pains. On the other hand, it is
precisely in this manner that fictitious documents making
mythical claims on the past invariably betray themselves,
in accordance with a very wise, if hidden law which appears
to protect history: in this case the manifold undesigned
exposures constitute only a signal instance of the provi-
dential rule in its operation.

There are two other points which call to be mentioned
briefly. It is stated expressly that the Fama has been
“sent forth in five languages,” presumably that the
“learned of Europe,” to whom it was addressed more
especially,? might have no difficulty in forming a judgment

1 In his Dara or THE History or THE Rosicructans, second edition, 1916,
said to be “revised,” Dr. Westcott has the temerity to suggest that Frater D.".
was “ chosen to be Magus ”’—a title unknown in the Order Manifestoes—
after the death of C..R..C.:., and after his own death was succeeded by
Frater A.".,on whom followed Frater N ..N .., who, however, was a novice,
according to the text and originally a pupil of A... The same spirit of
incautious speculation expressed in terms of historical certitude characterises
the so-called data throughout. There is, however, a Frater D.*. mentioned
in the memorials. P.*.D.°., according to Westcott, died after 1..0.., in
the lifetime of C..R..C... But the authority for this seems in the
reverie of the Supreme Magus of the Sec. Ros.

2 T have said that the Fama was addressed to the learned in particular, as
appears indeed by its title, but the following sentence is added as a kind of
colophon to the discovery of the tomb of Christian Rosy Cross: ‘* And so do
we expect the answer and judgment of the learned and unlearned.” One of
the amazing suggestions put forward by Kieswetter is that the fact of the
‘Fama being translated into so many languages “ shews that many persons
possessed a key to its symbolism.” It shews obviously nothing of the kind,
and that the tract in question was so translated we have seen to be very
doubtful.

137

-- Page 166 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
concerning it in their own vernaculars; but so far as can
be determined by the negative results of research, and so
far as all records are concerned, the affirmation can repre-
sent a matter of intention only. The editions were German,
Dutch and perhaps Latin ; there is no trace of a concurrent
French version, and nothing appeared in England till 1652.
As the statement is repeated in the Conregssio respecting
that manifesto, one would have expected the design to have
been fulfilled, at least in the second case, but I have found
nothing. However, the only real research on the biblio-
graphical side of the Rosy Cross has been done in Germany
and France, and it is not beyond possibility that something
may have been produced in Italy, perhaps even in Spain.
This is the first point, and as regards the second it should
be mentioned that, while inviting answers and judgments,
the Fama Fraternitatis provided no means of communica-
tion except through the public press—e.g. by the voice of
memorials and letters in printed form—as it did not
disclose any place of convocation and the manifesto was
quite anonymous. While the only courses open were
adopted freely enough, the appearance of the Conressio
—recognising that it was of subsequent publication—must
have been expected with much anticipation by a great
many eager hearts, in the hope that it would provide more
definite means of access. The assurance given in the first
manifesto was perhaps a preliminary test applied by the
Order to those whom it would call in good time to its
service ; but it could scarcely go on for ever. The covenant
was expressed thus: “ And although at this time we make
no mention of our names or our conventions, yet shall
every one’s opinion come into our hands assuredly, and
those who give even but a name shall not fail to speak with
us, either by word of mouth or—if there be some hindrance
—in writing.”

Such is the first and only historical account of the Order
138

-- Page 167 --
Fama Fraternitatis R.*.C.'.

which was issued—so to speak—officially. Many apologists
came forward in the early seventeenth century to espouse
its cause, and other documents appeared, speaking with
authority concerning it; but the story of its foundation
and the myth of its sacred sepulchre stood high and clear
above all. It is more especially in the eighteenth century
that we meet with other claims concerning its antiquity
and consequently with other personalities—for example,
the sage Ormuz—as connected with its origin.

The one point of importance which emerges in the Fama
is the tomb of Christian Rosy Cross and the fact of its
discovery. This is either an imaginative device to indicate
the supposed or pretended age of the Society, or it contains
a deeper meaning. It is difficult, from my point of view,
not to take the legend seriously, but of course as an emblem-
atical story. As such, it is in analogy with the finding of
that temporary grave in which the body of Hiram Abiff had
been laid hurriedly by his murderers, according to the
traditional history of the Masonic Craft Degrees. The
exhumation of that body is the central point in the myth
of the Master-Builder, and about it the whole symbolism
revolves. ‘There is, however, no Raising in the Rosicrucian
legend, and nothing follows apparently on that which is
seen and done in the Vault. In the end it is testified (1)
that the narrators replaced the altar, together with the
plate of brass beneath it; (2) that they came forth from
the heptagonal chamber ; (3) that they shut the door and
placed seals thereon; (4) that they departed one from
another; and (5) that they “left the natural heirs in
possession of our jewels.” The last statement is inscrutable,
but I conceive it to be simply one of those banalities of
expression which abound in Rosicrucian as in Masonic
documents. The “ natural heirs” were certainly not the
‘worms of the graveyard, for the body had remained ex
bypothest “ whole and unconsumed ” during one hundred

139

-- Page 168 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
and twenty years. Nor can it be intended to suggest that
the freeholders came into possession, following the ordinary
course, or that the goods were estreated because Frater
N..N.. had omitted to pay the rent of his “‘ building.”

In concluding this chapter it ought, I suppose, to be
mentioned that a few egregious persons, remanents of
occultism as it was preached in Victorian days, maintain
that the emblematical and symbolical myth of Father
Rosy Cross represents literal history. They believe in
“‘ everburning lamps” because so much has been written
on the subject that there must be something in it ;} they
regard the contradictions and stultifications in the Fama
and other texts as “ blinds,” meaning devices to mislead
critical persons ?; they are satisfied that if unique works
of Paracelsus were not discovered in the Vault it had
treasures of equal or greater value, which notwithstanding
they were probably there in fact ; they are convinced that
the tomb of Christian Rosy Cross exists somewhere in
Germany, and there is one favoured individual who knows
where it is and could lead an earnest student to the hallowed
spot, though he is not prepared to specify the place otherwise.°

1“ There is a very large mass of references to such an invention to be
found in old Latin literature, and there must have been some foundation
for them.”—Westcott : History oF THE Socreras Rosicruciana IN ANGLIA,
1900, p.2. Itis regrettable that radium had not been discovered at the date
of the memorial.

2 Compare Westcott, however, in his Rosicrucian Dara, 1916, p. 5. “It
should be noted that although the Fama and the Conressio gave to the
world a knowledge of the existence of the Rosicrucian Fraternity, there is
no evidence that these publications were authorised; ... certain dis-
crepancies . . . in these tractates bear internal evidence that they were not
written by anyone who had accurate historical information.” But in the
previous Hisroricat Norice he sees “ nothing unreasonable ” in supposing
that some “ mystic student ” should have been admitted “ into the Order,
should have written the Conressto, and “should have been told off” to
publish the Fama.

3 The favoured individual is not Dr. Westcott, who, however, testifies
as follows: “ It has been stated that this Tomb still exists, but its situation
is only revealed to high Continental adepts.””—Dara, p. 5.

140

-- Page 169 --
Fama Fraternitatis R.*.C.".
They are a mad world, my masters, but they are Magi,
Magistri and Adepti, sub umbra alarum tuarum, O Societas
Rosicruciana in Anglia, and mote especially under the zany’s
cap of the Metropolitan College.

There is one thing more: it is to be observed that
Fama Frarerniratis offers a clear issue in respect of its
story and the claims connoted thereby. If it is not without
discrepancies they belong to the minima. It is evident that
the opening of the Tomb led, by the implied hypothesis,
to the greater discovery, being that of the Rosy Cross,
making an appeal in public to the mind of gentle and simple
in the German world.

It seems evident also, at least to my own mind, that
the text is typical of inventions which came into existence
by scores, as from circa 1723 to about the same date in
the nineteenth century. I refer to the fabulous histories
of certain Rites and Orders, Masonic and super-Masonic.
They were devised to justify the existence and pretensions
of their particular institutions, and however fraudulent
in fact were serious by intention. I shall indeed indicate
later that there was from time to time a background of
mental sincerity in those who made them. In some cases,

moreover, as in the Third Craft Degree, they were parables
as well as myths and were then comparable, within their
proper measures, to the Mystery Legends of Eleusis, the
Dionysiacs and Samothrace. The Fama story is a legend
which accounts, after its particular fashion, for the hypo-
thetical transmission of secret knowledge from East to
West, and there are many others in its likeness. There is
not the least reason on the surface to assume that it was
not intended seriously. ‘There were numbers at that
period and before it who believed themselves to have

acquired an occult theosophia, philosophia and even scientia,

drawn by their studies from various quarters and valuable
in their own eyes. It is an arguable proposition that in
14]

-- Page 171 --
CHAPTER VI

CONFESSIO FRATERNITATIS R..C..
Tue Fama Fraternitatis makes several references to
a forthcoming Conresston of the Order, in which things
left over by the original manifesto or treated shortly therein
were to be communicated with a certain fullness. It would
furnish (1) further information concerning the Boox M -.. ;
(2) a Table of thirty-seven reasons for making known the
fact of the Fraternity and for offering such high mysteries
without constraint or reward; (3) an elucidation on the
subject of the Rota, which is mentioned twice in the Fama
as something to be consulted, but it is left uncertain
whether it was a method of divination or a set of rules for
guidance; and finally (4) a catalogue of sophistic works
on Chemia which came under the sentence of having been
written in contumeliam glorie Dei. The last point is only
a matter of inference: the list in question is promised,
but whether to appear in the Conrgssio or in a separate
form is not determined. It is affirmed also that the Con-
FEssio, like the Fama, would be “sent forth in five lan-
guages.”

The bibliography of the second document is similar to
that of the first, a matter of considerable confusion. We
have seen that according to Lenglet du Fresnoy there was
a Latin edition of the Fama in 1614, but it seems unknown
to other bibliographers, and I have failed to trace it,
though I am satisfied as to the antecedent probability of
such a Latin text, whether it was printed or not. Ina Latin

143

-- Page 172 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
edition of the Fama er Conressro, published together at
Ratisbon in 1614, I must confess that I do not believe.
The internal evidence of the Fama is against the simul-
taneous issue of these documents.2 There was something
to follow the Fama, and it was described as “‘ our Confes-
sion,” while—uncritical as it was—the interest taken in the
Commounis ET GENERALIS RerorMATio from the beginning

1 Tt does not appear in the great bibliography of Kloss, but he is said to
have heard of it by report, though the actual content of the alleged Ratisbon
edition is not clear by his allusion. I find nothing to confirm this anywhere
in his notes. When the Fama was circulated in MS., as affirmed frequently,
it is likely to have been in Latin and may have been read in this form by
Haselmeyer, who had, however, no knowledge of the Conressio at that
time. Nicolai speaks of the Fama and Nurriz Cuymicz being reprinted
at Ratisbon in 1781.

2 Hereinafter follows a summary account of the texts with which I am
acquainted at first hand and by report: (1) Philippus a Gabella: Szcre-
Tionis PuHILosopHi@ COoNSIDERATIO, CUM CONFESSIONE FRATERNITATIS
Rose#-Crucis epita. Francofurti, 1615. This is in quarto, and is un-
questionably the first edition of the text with which we are concerned.
(2) The same in octavo, 1616, also issued at Frankfurt. (3) Apocrisis, seu
Responsio ad Famam Rosee Crucis, cum Confessione et Litteris quorundam,
Fraternitatem se dare volentium. Francofurti, 1615, 4to. (4) Fama Frarerni-
TaTIs Rost Crucis, cum FORUM ConFESsIONE, Latine et Germanice a
Friedens Begierigen Philomago. At Cassel in 8vo, 1615, and in the same year
at Frankfurt, in 12mo. (5) Conressio er Liver QUORUNDAM FRATERNITATI
R..C.*. se paRE voLentium. Francofurti, 1615, 4to. Probably identical
with No. 3. (6) Fama Frarernitatis R..C 1. Das tst Geriicht der Briider-
schaft des Hochléblichen Ordens des Rosen-Kreutzes an alle Gelehrte und
Hiupter Europa. Benebst derselben lateinischen ConFEssion, welche vorbin in
Druck noch nie ausgegangen, nubnmebr aber auff vielfaltiges anfragen, zusampt
deren beyge figten Teutschen Version. In Druck gegeben von einem... Philo-
mago, Cassel, 1615. This wasin1zmo. The statement that the Conressio had
never been edited previously would be exceedingly valuable, on the assump-
tion that it could be taken literally, meaning that there had been no earlier
Latin text. Jt would put an end to the fable concerning a Ratisbon edition
in 1614 and give this publication a priority over that which is connected with
the name of Philippus a Gabella. But the text of the Conressio certifies
that it was written in Latin, as we have seen. The edition under notice
may be identical with No. 4, which I owe to Lenglet du Fresnoy, who in this
case has shortened the title and turned it into Latin, justifying my opinion
that Latin titles in old Rosicrucian bibliographies do not mean of necessity
that the works were also in Latin. (7) Fama FraTErniratis,o ft ontdeckinge van
der Broederschap des loflijcken Ordens des Rosen-Cruyces. The Dutch edition

144

-- Page 173 --
Confessio Fraternitaus R.*.C.".
of the Rosicrucian debate offers a presumption that they
appeared together, and this is confirmed by the pre-
ponderating evidence of all bibliographical research.
However this may be, there is and can be no question
that the Conressio itself was produced originally in Latin,
for the text says: “It is no wonder that we are not
so eloquent in other tongues, and least of all in this
Latin.” The year 1615 saw it translated into German,
noted previously as published, sine loco, 1615, in 8vo. (8) Fama FRATERNI-
tatis, oder Entdeckung der Briiderschaft des léblichen Ordens des Rosenkreutzes.
Francofurti, 1615, 8vo. (9) Fama Frarerniratis, beneben der CONFESSION
oder Bekanntniss derselben Fraternitat, an alle Gelehrte und Hdaupter in
Europa geschrieben. Auch etlichen Responstonen und Antwortungen, von
Herren HaserMeyern .. . Sampt einem Discurs VON ALLGEMEINEN REFORMA~
TION DER GANZEN WELT. WNebst 4 SENDSCHREIBEN darzugesetzt, von vielen
Erraten entledigt, verbessert und gedruckt zw Cassel. 8vo, 1616, See my
bibliographical note on editions of the Fama, c.v. of the present work.
(10) A reprint of No. 9, without the Unrversat Rerormarion and the 4
Senpscurzipen. Frankfurt, 1617, 8vo. (11) Fama Frarernitatis, oder
Entdeckung der Briiderschafft dess lablichen Ordens des Rosen Creutzes.
Beneben der Conression, oder Bekanntnuss derselben Fraternitat .......
Fetzo .. . zum andern mal in druck ver fetiget. Sampt dem SENDTSCHREIBEN
Juuianr pe Campis und G. Moutuert . . . Relation, von einer dess Ordens
gewissen Person. Frankfurt am Mayn, 1617, 8vo. It is possible to extend
this continental list, but my purpose has been served sufficiently, and so
also, as J think, the requirements of any literate reader. It remains, how-
ever, to add (12) the Fame anp Conression oF THE Fraternity or R..C...,
commonly of the Rosy Cross. With a Preface annexed thereto, and a Short
Declaration of their Physical Work. By Eugenius Philalethes. London,
1652. The publisher’s Advertisement to the Reader explains that the
translation “ belongs to an Unknown Hand.” See my Works or THomas
VauGHAN, 1919, p. 490. This edition is misdescribed by Lenglet du Fresnoy
as La ConFEssioN DE LA ConFRaiRIE DE LA Rosg-Crorx, par Eugenius
Philalethes, in 8vo. London, 1652. The size is small 12mo. (13) There is
also Ashmolean MS. No. 1459: Tue Conression of the Laudable and
Honest (sic) esteemed Order, or Fraternity of the Rose-Crosse, written to
the learned in Europe, with a preface to the wisdome-desirous reader. It
occupies fols. 300, 301-11 of the volume cited, and is believed to have
been transcribed from No. 1478, a folio volume divided into six parts,
described as closely written in the time of James I or Charles I. According
to Nicolai—who said that it had passed through his hands—the edition of
Eugenius Philalethes was reprinted in 1658, but I find no evidence other-
wise. See Kloss, s.v. No. 2435, p. 176.
L 45

-- Page 174 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
and how frequently afterwards my note on the subject
shews.?

The Cownressto FRATERNITATIS was introduced by a
short preface addressed to “the reader who is desirous of
wisdom,” and it calls his attention to the “ thirty-seven
reasons of our purpose and intention” which had been
promised in the Fama and are contained in the new mani-
festo.? It will be as well at the outset to clear the issues
by mentioning that we learn nothing whatever concerning
the Boox M..., nothing as regards the Rota, and that in
place of a catalogue of sophistic books we have only a
further diatribe on “the worthless works of pseudo-
chemists,” with particular reference to one writer only,
and he is not mentioned by name. Moreover, the thirty-
seven reasons are not set out in an ordered manner—or
indeed after any manner at all—but are left for extraction
by the reader from the text itself. There was never a
document pretending to advance further considerations
in the matter of an important claim which has exhibited
a greater want of method, not to speak of those difficulties
and objections which will be dealt with as we proceed.
The alleged reasons may be collected tentatively as
follows: (1) The Fama FraternitAatis is not to be believed
hastily nor suspected wilfully. (z) Notwithstanding this
counsel of caution, it is referable to the will of Jehovah,
Who observes that the decaying world is now near its

1 I may observe here that Claudio Jannet, who wrote Les Pricurseurs
DE LA Francmacgonneris in 1887 and is an authority among French anti-
Masons, because he is one of them, is in singular confusion on the Rosi-
crucian class of supposed precursors. He does not seem to have heard of
Conressto Fraterniratis and suggests that the manifestoes began to appear
at Venice. He refers the Fama to 1645.

3 In the first edition it is also introduced or preceded by a Prayer, placed
immediately after the text of Gabella’s Consiperatio and signed Purtemon
PHivavELpHi, followed by the initials R...C... The Order is mentioned
also in Gabella’s dedication to Uffel. The Constprratio itself is not of
our especial concern.

146

-- Page 175 --
Confessio Fraternitatis R.*.C.".
end,! and therefore lays open that which heretofore has been
sought with great pains and labour. (3) It will smooth the
ways of the good and augment the punishment of the ungodly.
(4) As regards the nature of the Order, it cannot be sus-
pected of heresy or of schemes against the commonwealth,
since it condemns the East and the West—meaning the
Pope and Mahomet—and “ offers the head of the Roman
Empire our prayers, secrets and great treasures of gold.” *
(s) As regards the amendment of philosophy, which is
altogether weak and faulty,’ the way of its renovation in
a new and renovated world is offered in the place of its
disease—meaning Germany. (6) The philosophy of the
Rosy Cross is the head of all the faculties, searching both
heaven and earth. (7) It manifests the microcosmus or
man. (8) It unfolds also the wonders of the sixth age.
(9) If all books shall perish, “‘ the meditations of our
Christian father... are so great” that “posterity will
be able thereby to lay a new foundation of sciences and
erect a new citadel of truth.”’* (10) It must not be expected
that new-comers shall attain forthwith the possession of
all “our secrets”: it will be a graduated process, from
‘small beginnings to greater ends. (11) It is God Who has
decreed at this time an increase in the number of our

1 This is the Naomertria formula and the accredited expectation of the
Minitia CruciFrera EvancEica; but it is connected by the fifth clause with
the notion of a renewal to come, as if the Order of the Rosy Cross had a
mission to restore all things, coincidently with the Second Advent, or as if
its own manifestation were a kind of spiritual return of Christ.

2 It is possible that this mendacious generosity was a device adopted to
secure for the Order a certain State toleration, so that it might proceed on
its path in peace. We shall see that in Holland at a later period there was a
proposal on the part of the Magistrates and of a Theological Faculty to
suppress what was called “ the new sect.”

8 Compare the Universat Rerormarion: (1) “The maladies which
molest our age equal the stars of heaven ” ; and (2) “ our business, gentlemen,
is to cure the present age of the foul infirmities under which it labours.”

4 Compare the analogous statement in Fama FraTerniratis, as noted in
my previous chapter.

147

-- Page 176 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
Fraternity: the task has been undertaken with joy and
will be put in practice faithfully ; but the good things can
neither be inherited nor conferred promiscuously. (12)
“The worth of those who shall be accepted into our
Fraternity will not be measured by their curiosity but by
the rule and pattern of our revelations.” (13) The un-
worthy may clamour, but such is the Ordinance of God
that we shall “hear none of them,”? and—encompassed
by His clouds—no violence can be done “to us, who are
His servants.” (14) As only men of understanding rule
in Damcar, so shall a government be instituted also in
Europe, “ according to the description set down by our
Christian father.” 1 (15) Whosoever can see and read
“those great characters which the Lord God hath in-
scribed upon the world’s mechanism . . . is ours already ” ;
and (16) assured that such an one will not neglect our
invitation, “‘ we promise that no man’s uprightness and
hopes shall betray him who shall make himself known to
us, under the seal of secrecy.” (17) But those who look for
other things than wisdom shall be partakers of that terrible
commination announced in the Fama, and their designs
shall fall back upon themselves.? (18) God has decreed an
influx of truth, light and splendour before the end of the

1 Tt was therefore a bid for empire, brought about ex bypothesi by a con-
quest of science and wisdom. Compare the fourth clause, which affirms
that there are no schemes against the commonwealth. Ex bypothesi also it
would redound to the good of the commonwealth, and the head of the
Roman Empire was offered a share in the supposed secrets. In this
respect at least the Conressio strikes a new note on the subject-matter
of reform.

> The ““commination””? of the Fama is perhaps more banal than
terrible : It threatens false-hearted and covetous aspirants with “utter
destruction ; but one would have thought it sufficient punishment for
them to be left in the outer darkness, which of course also befel them, by the
claim of the text. The Conressio adds in the same connection that the
treasures of the Order shall remain unrifled by such till the Lion shall arise
and demand them, to aid in the foundation of His Kingdom—another
Second Advent reference.

148

-- Page 177 --
Confessio Fraternitatis R.*.C.-.

world,! so that darkness and bondage shall cease in the
arts and governments of men. (19) A single and self-same
rule shall be instituted.2. (20) The Order by no means
arrogates to itself the glory of this work, as if it “ were
imposed only on us”; but “ we testify, with our Saviour
Christ, that sooner shall the stones rise up and offer their
service than there shall be any want of executors of God’s
counsel.” (21) He has sent His messengers already, namely,
new stars in Serpentarius and Cygnus, the same being
potent signs of a great council, for the Book of Nature
stands free to all eyes, though few there are to read it.

(22) The eyes and the ears have been opened for some in
the ages going back, but there is a time coming when the
tongue shall be loosened ; the world will then have slept
away the effects of her stupefying chalice and will go forth
joyously to meet the sun in the morning. (23) There are
secret characters and letters in the Sacred Scriptures, and
they are inscribed also on all the works of creation, the
heavens, the earth and beasts. (24) ‘“‘ From these letters
we have derived our magical writing,” making a new
language, in which the nature of things is expressed: it
is the tongue of Adam and Enoch, contaminated subse-
quently by the confusion which came upon man at Babel,
and very different from languages which have prevailed

1 The Naomerria formula, which recurs in this text, is found nowhere
inthe Fama. It constitutes another distinction between the two works.

2 Compare the fourteenth clause.

3 The “ new star in Serpentarius ” was that of 1604 and was observed and
described by Kepler. Serpentarius is known by its Greek equivalent
Ophiuchus in modern maps of the heavens, The star in Cygnus—a.p. 1602
~—was brighter than that in Serpentarius and is said to have been visible in
daylight. A Stella nova Cygni was seen in the same celestial region on
November 24th, 1876. There was also the famous star which was described
by Tycho-Brahe and appeared in 1572-4, as it had done previously in a.p.
945 and 1264. It was called the Star of Bethlehem. See Humboldt’s
Cosmos for the account by Tycho-Brahe. This was in Cassiopeia. A full
account of it by William Hutton will be found in Zadkiel’s Atmanac
for 1879.

149

-- Page 178 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

since, wherein we lay no claim to eloquence.t (25) An
excellent way to the Order is by the study of the Holy
Scriptures, because these are “ the whole sum of our laws.” #
(26) The Bible indeed is the rule of life, the end of all
studies and the compendium of the universal world: its
true interpretation should be applied to all ages. (27) No
more excellent and admirable book has been given to man
from the beginning of things. (28) “ Blessed is he who
possesses it ; more blessed is he who reads it ; most blessed
of all is he who understands it truly,” while whosoever
understands and obeys it is one who is most like unto God.
(29) Whatever was said in the Fama against “ the trans-
mutation of metals and the supreme medicine of the world ”
was actuated by hatred of impostors and does not signify
disdain for these great gifts of God. (30) There are, how-
ever, many other magnalia, while the observation of Nature
and the knowledge of philosophy are preferable to the
tincture of metals. (31) The worthless books of pseudo-
chemists must be rejected; they profit by the curiosity
of the credulous, deceive men by monstrous symbols and
enigmas, and apply the Most Holy Trinity to vain things.
(32) The Order offers participation in its own treasures,
putting forward no lying tinctures and seeking no goods
of others. (33) It extends to those whom it invites within
its penetralia the means of co-operating in the work of

1 Compare Menken: Dz 1a CHARLATANERIE DES SAVANTS, 1721. He says
that among the “admirable gifts” ascribed to the Brethren of the Rosy
Cross the most remarkable was that of speaking perfectly the languages of
the different countries through which they were dispersed. They shewed
that kind of facility which would suggest that they were native-born.
A writer named J. Berger is quoted as remarking that this aptitude is
characteristic of Jews, which does not appear especially or generally accurate‘
at least as regards the present day.

® According to Mrs. Constance M. Pott “ one great work of the Society
was the publication and dissemination of Bibles,” and this is said to be shewn
by the testimony of Rosicrucian books, though not by the first manifestoes.
As usual, there is no reference.

150

-- Page 179 --
Confessio Fraternitatis R.*.C.".

God, of being serviceable therefore to the age, having
regard to the imperfection and inconsistencies of all the
arts. (34) In this manner those riches of Nature which lie
scattered everywhere on the earth will be gathered together,
tanguam in centro solis et lune. (35) The things which
obscure human knowledge and hinder human action will
then be driven out of the world. (36) But those whom God
wishes either to test or chastise will never be helped by
opportunities extended from within the circle of the Order,
even though there may be a Medicine which cures all
diseases ; and finally, says the official document (37), “‘ we
shall never be manifested to any man” except with God’s
concurrence ; on the contrary, ‘‘ he shall sooner lose his
life in seeking us than attain his bliss by finding.”

Here, then—duly drawn forth—are thirty-seven con-
siderations or reasons of purpose, intention and what not
imbedded in the Conressio FraTernitatis, and they fairly
exhaust the sense of that second discourse which claims to be
addressed by the Order to the learned of Europe. It must
be admitted that they could have been otherwise divided—
at least here and there—as some few of them might have
been drawn together and a few others split up.!_ There are

1 Tn an Anatysis Conressionis FRaTerNnitatis DE Rosza Cruce, Andreas
Libavius made an extraction after his own manner of the thirty-seven reasons,
and I will present them in summary form for purposes of comparison. They
are termed Argumenta by Libavius, and it is to be understood that his exami-
nation is hostile to the claims of the Order, both general and particular:
(1) The promised restoration of this world to the state of Paradise before
the Fallof man. (2) The defects in Art, Science and Religion. (3) The free
offering by Divine decree of those things which have been attained previ-
ously by great toil alone. (4) The possession by the Order of a healing balm
for human trouble. (5) The Order can open a true medial way, by which the
ills of our country may be healed and things can be made anew. (6) It knows
the wonders of the sixth age. (7) It proffers great secrets and sets open
a house of treasures. (8) And yet its arena can be in no wise made common
or familiar. (9) It shews forth new truth and the building of an ark of
truth. (10) The truth is to be found only in the Rosy Cross. (11) It is an
asylum for those who would escape hunger, disease and old age. (12) It is
the place also of those who would so live as if they had been from the

151

-- Page 180 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

certain extraneous matters which are not in the nature of
“ reasons ”’ and have not appeared therefore in the enumera-
tion given above. (1) The Conressio is a scurrilous and
blatant document on the subject of Latin Christianity.
One would think that its author had reflected on a remark
of the Fama concerning the original “ Brethren and
Fathers,” who if they had lived in the “ clear light” of
the post-Lutheran period would have handled the Pope
more roughly. And thus reflecting it was concluded, one
might think also, that the time was ripe for illuminati of
the third circle to give samples of their mettle, seeing that
— according to the Advertisement—it was now quite safe
to call the Pope Antichrist, and to say what they would
do with him, if only he came into their hands. The valour
of Alsatia and Whitefriars broke out accordingly in the
beginning and should prevail even to the end. (13) While remaining in that
place in which it has pleased God to set them, the Brethren know things
which occur at a distance, even by the Ganges and in Peru. (14) The Order
promises the coming destruction of the Pope. (15) It seeks no man’s money.
(16) It would make others partakers of its own great goods. (17) It does
not create deceptions by false tinctures and does not speak in enigmas.
(18) It leads to a full and simple explanation of secrets and invites to
royal palaces. (19) It has come forward by the impulsion of the Holy Spirit.
(20) It communicates the good things which Nature scatters over the world
at large. (21) It removes that which darkens and hinders human minds.
(z2) It confesses Christ sincerely. (23) The Father of the Rosy Cross lived for
106 years and saw many changes in the world. (24) Darkness and falsehood
involve all arts and works of man. (25) Those who are desirous of light and
truth in experience should seek within the Order. (26) It is in possession of
a right and certain rule. (27) The happiness of the present age inheres
therein, and this should not be neglected. (28) Many excellent men have
promoted rapid reformation by their writings, and it behoves others not to
be behindhand in respect of the Order. (29) The counsel of God is to raise
up the humble and abase the proud. (30) He sends His angels to those who
are secret and silent. (31) He abandons babblers to their own devices.
(32) Be ye carriers of that which is noble unto all mankind. (33) Chrysopaa
is the gift of God and is not to be spurned or rejected. (34) But it does not
always give the knowledge of Nature. (35) Nature also proffers not only
medicine but innumerable other secrets and wonders. (36) The first need
1s to follow after the knowledge and understanding of philosophy. (37) Great
treasures are ours, and these we offer : come therefore to us.

-- Page 181 --
Con fessio Fraternitatis R.*.C’.’.
terminology of Colonel Blood. The Pope was found guilty
of blasphemies against Jesus Christ ; it was proclaimed, in
hot-gospel derision of merely historical fact, that—“‘ after
many chafings in secret of pious persons ”—he had been
‘cast down from his seat by a great onset” and nobly
“trodden under foot.” But as he was enthroned actually
at St. Peter’s, or holding royal court in the Vatican, hearing
nothing of these gutter-born ravings, the aspirations of the
adepti went further, and they expressed three hopes for
the future: (a) that his utter destruction was in reserve ;
(5) that he would be “ torn in pieces with nails” ; and (c)
that a “ final groan” would end his “ asinine braying.” 3
It may have been the manner born of the Holy Mysteries,
as understood by the German mind in the early seventeenth
century, and it may have breathed all the loving spirit
of our highly “illuminated,” “ loving” and “ Christian
Father’; but to us at the present day it seems redolent
of stables which have not been built in Bethlehem and in
which Christ was never born. (2) The Conrsssio parades
that ‘unhoped for graciousness”? which has led the Fra-
ternity to come forward; seeks to reassure those who have
been overwrought by “the surprise of our challenge”;
assures all and sundry—in extension of Consideration X—
that such as are received will be taken “‘ step by step ” *

1 It is said also that the “ Roman impostor,” notwithstanding the full
light which has been cast by Germany upon his doings, “ will not abstain
from lying,” but is fulfilling “‘ the measure of his sin,” that he may be “ found
worthy of the axe.” On a day to come, “ the mouth of this viper shall be
stopped.” It it registered finally that Rosicrucians “ execrate the Pope”’—a
redundant statement after all that has been mentioned previously. The text
reads like a postscript to Naometrra, added after 1612, when the crucifixion
of the Sovereign Pontiff had failed to take place.

2 Tt is said further on that the Fraternity is “ divided into degrees,”
which has led the authors of Tue Rosicrucians to suppose that the Order
worked in Ritual from the beginning; but the reference is to modes of
government, questions of power and influence. It is pointed out, for
example, that “ those which dwell in Damcar have a different political order
from that of other Arabians and that they make “ particular laws” by

153

-- Page 182 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
through the great mysteries which await them and will
not be made free at once of the whole Pandora’s box;
comforts those who may “complain of our discretion, that
we offer our treasures so freely” ; repeats over and over
that “the unworthy may clamour a thousand times” in
vain; reiterates the assurance that God has decreed a
numerical expansion of the Brotherhood ; and yet appears
to intimate that there are certain hindrances, some things
which call to be removed, “ some eagle’s feathers in our
way,” as though people must be content to wait if they
continue to hear nothing in respect of their chief desire.
(3) As regards sophistic books on the subject of alchemy,
it is said with great truth that ‘“‘ our age produces many.”
The Conrgssto has also a notable personal statement,
that one of the “ pseudo-chemists ” is a “‘ stage-player ”
and “a man with sufficient ingenuity for imposition.”
The original Latin version calls him an ‘‘ Amphitheatral
Comedian,” which I have compared carefully with
available German and Dutch texts, as also with the
English translation edited by Thomas Vaughan. The
last renders as follows. “‘There are nowadays too
many such books set forth, which the enemy of
man’s welfare doth daily—and will to the end—mingle
among the good seed, thereby to make the truth more
difficult to be believed, which in herself is simple, easy and
naked.” 1 Jt is hopeless at this day to speculate on the
the King’s permission. It was not so in Europe at the period of the
Conressio, but a change would come about herein at a due time. There is
no trace of Ritual procedure till 1710, and then it is a mere vestige. The
second half of the eighteenth century saw great developments. Meanwhile
it is clear from the Fama that individual Brethren appointed their individual
successors, who repaired subsequently to the place of convocation and took
“ the solemn oath of fidelity and secrecy.”

qT do not know how the translation “ stage-player ” arose, but it is

exceedingly loose, seeing that the Latin description is almost certainly

figurative. The original, in the German Conressto of 1617 reads: unter

welchen der Amphitheatralische und zum verfubren genugsam simmreiche
154

-- Page 183 --
Confessio Fraternitatis R.*.C\.
question of identity, about which great nonsense has been
talked, both here and in Germany. (4) The Conressio
Fraternitatis furnishes the first date in the history of
the Rosy Cross, when it says that “ our Christian father ”
was born in 1378. According to the Fama, he reached
Damcear at the age of sixteen years. On the basis of the
same document, Michael Maier computes that he was
absent for a period of six years from Europe and then
proceeds to speculate that he “ruminated ” in his “ neat
and fitting habitation ” for thirteen years, at the end of
which time, or in 1413, he began to recruit his disciples.
He certifies that this is conjectural, and it is obvious that
it contradicts the Fama, which says that after five years
“ there came again into his mind the desired reformation,”
as a result of which he decided to “ have out of his first
cloister . . . three of his brethren.”2 According to
Cuymiscue Hocuzeir, he was present at the Hermetic
Wedding of the King and Queen in 1459, being therefore
aged eighty-one years. By the hypothesis of the Fama,
Histrio und Comediant ein furnemer ist. In Bacontana, Vol. I, No. 3, May,
1893, a German writer—Dr. Georg Cantor—aflirmed that the whole
passage was an allusion—as I have mentioned previously—to Heinrich
Khunrath, which appears improbable and has no better basis than the
connection between Amphitheatralische and the AMPHITHEATRUM of
Khunrath’s Magnum Opus. The Hermetic theosophist had been dead—as
we have seen—for some twelve years before the Conressio appeared, and I
should say that his work had made no particular mark on its period. Dr.
Cantor seems to have held that the Conressto was written by Dr. Dee, who
had certainly met Khunrath in his travels abroad. The Baconians of 1893
and onward fell upon the allusion and at once attributed it to Shakespeare,
as in their view the Rosicrucian documents were all written by Bacon. It
may be left as an insoluble problem why the author, in such case, should have
reviled himself in the person of his literary mask.

1 According to the Fama, he remained for three years at Damcar, thence
proceeding to Egypt— where he remained not long ”—and afterwards to
Fez, “where the Arabians had directed him.” ‘There he stayed two years
and thence sailed to Spain, where we have seen that he, his discoveries and
spoil of quest were flouted. The same experience awaited him from
“other nations.’ According to this itinerary, he must have been absent
from Germany for much more than the six years specified by Maier,

155

-- Page 184 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

his tomb remained undisturbed for one hundred and twenty
years, he having died—according to another speculation—
at the age of one hundred and six, in which case the sepul-
chre was unsealed in 1604,! being the date borne on the
title-page of Simon Studion’s Naometria. It may appear
illogical to debate the chronology of a legend or—more
correctly—of a devised mythos; but the dates are not
without consequence for the subject under other aspects.
There is no doubt, for example, that on more than a
single consideration the year 1604—or round about that
period—is important for origins in respect of the Rosy
Cross, while the two years by which it was immediately
preceded will come before us in another unexpected
connection in the next chapter but one.

I have now exhausted the content of the Cownresssio
Frarernitatis RC .., and it will have been seen that it
is not a satisfactory document, as produced in support
of a considerable and ambitious claim. It dwells like the
Fama on a reformation other than that of Luther and yet
scarcely apart from religion in the sense of Bible Christ-
ianity. As such, it offers, as we shall find, a marked con-
trast to the opinions and large-hearted sentiments of Robert
Fludd, who held through all his days with zealous affection
to the Church as established in England, and yet the
Pontiff on the Throne of Peter is mentioned with respect
by him, even when disallowing his claims. But Fludd’s
was no voice of an anonymous, without local habitation or

1 The speculation seems based on the hypothesis that the centum vigintt
anni did actually end in 1604. The schedule may be taken out as follows:
Birth-date=1378 ; age on reaching Damcar=16=1394 ; time at Damcar=3
yeats=1397; time at Fez=2 years—1399; speculative period spent in
visiting European nations=5 years==1404; speculative “rumination ” of
Maier=13 years=1417, being date of recruiting disciples. C..R..C.. was
then 39 years old. But this allows nothing for time spent in transit from
place to place after leaving Damcar. An alternative schedule is as follows :
Birth-date==1378 ; Chemical Marriage=1459==81 years old; date of
death=1484=106 years old ; Opening of Tomb=1604=Iapse of 120 years.

156

-- Page 185 --
Confessio Fraternitatis R.*.C.".
name. He graduated at St. John’s College, Oxford, under
influences in opposition to those of the Puritans and Calvin,?
and during his travels abroad he made acquaintance with
the Guise and Papal families. In conclusion, the Con-
FESSIO FraTERNITATIS follows logically at its value from the
preceding manifesto and corresponds more or less to the
actual document which is promised therein, though it
does not include all that was announced in the Fama.
It is antecedently reasonable to suppose that there was
something behind the texts, namely, a group of persons
actuated by a certain motive and serious to that extent,
precisely as Masonic Rites innumerable had Masonic
personalities at their back, concerned seriously enough
with the varied interests and schemes which are embodied
in the Rites themselves.
1 See Craven: Dr. Roserr Fiunn, p. 20.
157

-- Page 186 --
CHAPTER VII
THE CHEMICAL NUPTIALS

Tue third and most singular in several respects of early
Rosicrucian documents—issued, so to speak, ex officio—
is called THe CuemicaL Marritace—or NupriaLs—or
Curistian Rosencreutz.!. In a kind of romance or vision,
it gives account at full length of a reception into the Greater
Mysteries of Alchemy, presented as a dramatic pageant,
in which the founder of the Rosy Cross took part, as one
who mingles with a crowd, uncertain for a long time
whether he is there by election or by a sufferance which may
turn against him. The date assigned to this event is 1459,
when—according to the mythical chronology of the

1 There are no bibliographical confusions and no other difficulties
respecting this text, for the editions are not numerous,?and there was no
pretence of its being translated into five languages. It will be sufficient to
mention (1) Cuymiscue Hocuzrrr Curistiant Rosencreutz, Anno 1459.
First printed at Strasbourg and sold by the successors of Lazarus Zetner,
anno 1616. (2) The same, but printed by Conrad Scher, 1616. (3) The
same, under the same auspices, being a third edition at Strasbourg, 1616.
(4) The same, according to Kloss, 1617. So far as I have been able to trace,
there were no other German editions. There are reports of a French
translation published in 1600, or alternatively at Ratisbon in 1603, both of
which dates are impossible and blunders of a catalogue-maker. I question
whether such a version was ever made, as there is no trace of it in any
authoritative bibliography ; but nothing attaches to the question in either
case. (5) Tue Hermetic Romance, or THe Cuymicar Weppinc. Written
in High Dutch by Curistian Rosencrevtz. Translated by E. Foxcroft, late
Fellow of King’s College in Cambridge. Licensed and entered according to
order. _ Printed by A, Sowle at the Crooked Billet in Holloway Lane,
Shoreditch, and sold at the Three Keys in Nag’s Head Court, Gracechurch
Street, 1690. ‘The British Museum has a curious transcript in manuscript
of this English version, and I shall recur to it at a much later stage.

158

-- Page 187 --
The Chemical Nuptials
literature—the first Master of the Order was more than
eighty years old. So far as it is possible to judge, the same
hand never reappears in the documents.

We have seen that THe UniversaL REFORMATION is
more or less literally translated from an Italian author,
Boccalini, and that it has no title to count as a
Rosicrucian publication. It differs in every respect from
the Fama and Conressio, the latter of these being written
in a stilted style, devoid of any literary method: it is
noticeable also as the work of a militant partisan of the
Reformation inaugurated by Luther, THE CuemicaL
Nuptiats, regarded from a literary standpoint—and also
in other respects—differs from all three, irradiating a rare
splendour of seeming Hermetic parable. With its innumer-
able quaint devices, its trumpets of beaten gold, its
spangled and sky-robed dames, its doves and ravens, its
badges of symbolic roses, its banners, wreaths and scarves,
its pages and maidens, its mighty palaces, having rare
halls and bedchambers, its wonderful adventures and
dramatic mysteries, it is rare reading even at this day,
independently of any possible hidden meaning.

The motto on the title of THe Cuemicat Nuptiats is—

Arcana publicata vilescunt et gratiam profanata amittunt :
Ideo ne margaritas objice porcis, seu asino substerne rosas.

But the author of these lines—whom [I do not claim to
identify—had forgotten Apuleius and his Goxpen Ass.
The great parable of the Hermetic Marriage is divided into
seven books, representing seven days in the dramatic
development of its mysteries. It should be noted that—
according to the title—the wedding which is celebrated
in the story was that of Christian Rosy Cross: CHyMIscHE
Hocuzeit CurisTIANI RosENcrEutz; but seeing that the
Master of the Rosy Cross is telling that which he witnessed
in a Secret Palace, it is understood to be his marriage in

159

-- Page 188 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

the sense only that he has written the minutes of the
spectacle. If I happened to be an occultist, seeing greater
things behind the written word than any of those who wrote,
I should call this title the veil of a singular mystery and
should remind readers that French bibliographers always
speak of Les Noces Cuimiquzs pu Pire Curitien Rosen-
Cruz and not Tue Curmica, Weppinc, written by him
in High Dutch—as Mr. Foxcroft put it. It would follow
that the Teutonic Master was recounting in a figurative
form the adornment of his own spiritual espousals, his
own golden marriage. But—not being an occultist—
I know that Mr. Foxcroft was really right in his rendering,
and that, by the hypothesis of his story, Christian Rosy
Cross beheld in pictured symbols the accomplishment of
the Magnum Opus, as the marriage of a King and Queen.
My readers may judge for themselves.

The Master at that time was tarrying in a little house
upon a hill, and on the eve before a certain Easter he was—
according to his own symbolism—preparing unleavened
bread in his heart and in the presence of the Paschal Lamb.
In the midst of meditations he found, unawares, behind
him “a fair and glorious lady,” wearing a sky-coloured
vestment bespangled with golden stars. She was a winged
woman of the height, and her wings were full of eyes, like
the cherubim. In her right hand she carried the fame of
a golden trumpet and in her left a great garner of letters
in all languages, as one who is commissioned to make
known in the four quarters the glory of the Rosy Cross.
She kept the silence of the threshold, and in such reverence
laid a letter on the table, departing thereafter and mounting
upward, while the hill re-echoed with a mighty blast o
proclamation from the golden clarion. The Master fell
upon his knees and so examined the letter, on the seal of
which was a cross—not, apparently, a Rosy Cross—and the
inscription: In hoc signo vinces. Within he discovered

160

-- Page 189 --
The Chemical Nuptials

an invitation to the Royal Wedding, about which he had
been told in a vision some seven years ago and had awaited
it with great earnestness. The missive was written in
golden letters on an azure field, and beneath it stood
Sponsus and Sponsa,1 by way of signatures. Over this he
prayed fervently and had mystic visions in the night. In
the morning he prepared himself for the way by putting
on a wedding-garment, binding a blood-red ribbon, cross-
wise—upon his shoulder and setting four red roses in his
hat. Here ended what is called the First Day of the
CuemicaL Nuptiazs.

Provided with bread, salt and water, Christian Rosy
Cross left his humble habitation and entered a forest,
observing that heaven above, the earth beneath, and all
that lived thereon were adorned against the coming marriage.
He went singing through the woodland till he reached
three cedars, on one of which was a tablet of welcome in
the name of the King and Bridegroom.? It contained an
inscription which told him of four ways to reach the Royal
Court. The first was short, dangerous and led through
a region of rocks; the second was long and circuitous,
while he that travelled it must turn neither to right nor
left, for there were many bypaths; the third was a royal
road and a journey amidst joyful pageants, but it was
scarcely for one in a thousand; the fourth and last could
no man take because it was a consuming way, encompassed

1 In this manner the form of invitation determines the personalities of
the marriage and reduces Christian Rosy Cross to his proper status as a guest
and witness thereof, or coadjutor therein. The celebration, by the wording
of the message, was to take place on a mountain, where stood “ three stately
Temples.” The fact is forgotten, however, in the general development of
the romance, part of which takes place in a palace on the sea-shore, or
actually within sight of a harbour, and partly in a tower on anisland. The
letter is in rhymed verse, and the sign of Philosophical Mercury appears in
the margin of the text.

® The tablet is described in the margin as tabella mercurialis and the
cedar to which it is affixed is termed arbor mercurialis.

M 161

-- Page 190 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

by fire and cloud: it was reserved for incorruptible bodies,
Christian Rosy Cross was now in no little perplexity, and
being seized with hunger and thirst he had recourse to his
bread, which a white dove came down to share. The
dove was attacked by a raven, also in search of food, and
took refuge in flight, whereupon the traveller pursued the
one in order to deliver the other. In this manner he found
himself entered unawares into one of the paths, leaving
the rest of his food behind him. A great wind made any
return impossible, but the road was clear in front, and was
that of the second or circuitous path. With the help of
a compass he kept to the meridian line, and at the hour of
the setting sun he beheld a stately portal far off on a high
hill. It was reached by expedition before night set in,
and he found it enriched with noble figures and devices,
while a tablet thereon was inscribed with the warning
words : Procul hinc, procul ite, profani. He was greeted by
a porter habited in sky-blue, who demanded his letter of
invitation, and on receiving it bade him welcome as an
acceptable guest. He asked also for the wayfarer’s name,
when C..R..C.. described himself as a Brother of the
Red Rosy Cross. He was invited finally to purchase a
golden token, in exchange for which he delivered his flask
of water. In fine, he received a letter for delivery to
another porter, who was keeper of a second gate, and under
the light of a flaming beacon—put up unawares as a guide
to those on the way—he drew to the end of his journey.

The tablet on this second gate was inscribed with the
words: Date et dabitur vobis. A chained lion was on guard,
but he was put back by the second porter, who received
the traveller’s letter and afterwards saluted him with
marked respect, even in the Name of God, as one whom
—* of long time ’—he would have seen gladly. It was
evident—except to himself—that Christian Rosy Cross
was coming unto his own in the Hermetic Palace of the

162

-- Page 191 --
The Chemical Nuptials

King, as he did—in the other legend—among the wise
men of Damcar. The porter required, however, that he
should purchase a further token, and when it proved that
the postulant had nothing but salt to offer, it was received
with thankful heart. The first token was inscribed with
the letters $.C. and the second with S.M. among the
respective meanings of which were Sponsus carus and sal
mineralis.1 But that which remained to be done he was
warned that he should do quickly. He made speed there-
fore and having entered, the door shut so suddenly behind
him that part of his wedding garment stuck fast therein
and he was forced to tear it away. On the further side
of this portal he was given a true guest-token, inscribed
with the letters S$.P.N., signifying sponsi presentandus
nuptits ® and also a pair of new shoes. He was presently
within the castle, where two pages led him to a small room,
and his grey head was tonsured, A bell rang without and
he was again led forward, but this time through man,
corridors and up winding stairs into a spacious hall, wherein
was a great multitude, not alone of emperors and kings,
princes and lords, but all sorts of people, poor and rich,
including persons of his own acquaintance, otherwise those
sophisters in alchemy who are denounced in Fama and
Conressio. His presence on such an occasion was a matter
of great mirth among them, and when trumpets sounded
to the table they scrambled for the highest seats, so that
Christian Rosy Cross “and some other sorry fellows ”
found room hardly at the lowermost end. A goodly feast
followed, and when they were warmed with wine the
babblers grew louder in their boasts and contention, till
the stately musick of stringed instruments charmed all
into silence. Thereafter opened a great door in the hall,

3 Alternatively: Sanctitati Constantia or Spes charitas and Sponsa
mittendus or Sal menstrualts.

2 Otherwise: Salus per naturam.

163

-- Page 192 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
amidst a blare of trumpets within; a procession of tapers
entered the banqueting-room, some thousands in number,
but those who bore them went invisible. At last came the
two honourable pages who had escorted C..R.«.C.. within
the castle precincts. ‘Their torches lighted in a radiant
Maiden, drawn on a self-moving golden throne. She was
clothed in a snow-white robe, sparkling with pure gold,
and is described as Virgo Lucifera. The company at the
board stood up, and she made her proclamation in the
name of the Bridegroom and the Bride, who had
witnessed the arrivals with joy. She reminded them,
however, that none had been called to the nuptials but
those who were prepared thereto, and that all the artists
must be therefore weighed on the morrow. Those who
misdoubted the ordeal might remain where they were and
then be dismissed from the castle. The trumpets sounded
again and the Virgin departed on her throne. The
majority of the guests resolved to await the weighing ;
but Christian Rosy Cross—convinced of his own unworthi-
ness—held back with some others in the Refectorium,
making nine in all. While the confident were lighted to
their separate chambers, those who had abased them-
selves were bound with cords and left in darkness to
contemplate their presumption in coming to this amazing
marriage.

The night-visions and vigils of Christian Rosy Cross
attained their end in the dawn of the Third Day. The
brave champions who had settled to withstand the ordeal
now trooped into the hall, and beholding the nine in their
bonds reproved their cowardice; but there was no loud
cry of the business, for the morning brought sober reflec-
tion. The trumpets sounded once more and Virgo Luci fera
entered, crowned with laurels, arrayed in red velvet and
girded with a white scarf. To those who had been bound
she promised on behalf of her Lord that it¥should fare

164.

-- Page 193 --
The Chemical Nuptials

better than with many of the presumptuous who yet
remained at liberty. Certain golden scales were now placed
in position and the work of weighing began. Of emperors,
kings and lords, few withstood the test, but there is particular
mention of one who proved Imperator in the truth of the
Rosy Cross, as in royalty of the world without: he was
therefore given a gown of red velvet, a laurel wreath and
a seat on the steps of the Virgin’s throne. Of the gentry—
both learned and unlearned—some two only were found in
perfection ; and then it was the turn of “ those vagabond
cheaters ” and makers of false stones, to be jerked out of
the scale with whips and scourges. It appears, however,
that among this motley crew there were a few of another
category, who earned their wreaths and robes. ‘This
business being also over, one of the captains of the castle
demanded that the poor bound brothers who had “ acknow-
ledged their misunderstanding ” should be set also on the
scale, but without danger or penalty. The greater part
miscarried and were placed peaceably on one side. One
of the first seven held out bravely and received his reward.
The ninth failed, but the eighth—who was C-.R..C ..—
“outstayed all the weights,” and when three men hung
on the other side of the beam, nothing could prevail
against him. Thereupon one of the pages stood up and
proclaimed with a loud voice: ‘“ That is He.” After such
manner was the pious pilgrim honoured, and it was given
him to release at will one of the captives. He chose the
first emperor, who was liberated and seated among the
victors. Meanwhile C..R..C.. had removed the roses
from his hat, and while they were held in his hand the
Virgin saw them and “ graciously requested them of me.”

This ended the trial, about ten o’clock in the forenoon.
But judgment had yet to be given and so a council was
convened, with the Virgin as president, and it found as
follows: (1) That the lords should be dismissed the castle,

165

-- Page 194 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

yet with befitting respect; (2) That some of the rest
should be caused to run out naked; (3) That yet others,
being stripped, should be scourged away from the pre-
cincts; (4) That those who had surrendered willingly
should depart without blame; (5) That those who had
misbehaved at the dinner should be punished in body and
life. The candidates who escaped lightly were told that
they had given credit to false books and had come
uninvited to the castle. To others it was said that
they had forged the false books, had befooled and
cheated many, diminishing regal dignity, and seeking to
ensnare the guests. In particular they had made use
of “ungodly, deceitful figures . . ., not even sparing
the Divine Trinity.” An unescapable execution followed
all the sentences, and this took place in the garden
about the castle, the King and Queen being present,
in a curtained gallery, so that they sat and watched
invisible.

When all was over, those who remained as guests ad-

1 Compare the Fama Fraterniratis R..C.., which says: “We must
earnestly admonish you that you cast away ... the worthless books of
pseudo-chemists, to whom it is a jest to apply the Most Holy Trinity to vain
things, or to deceive men with monstrous symbols and enigmas.” This part
of Tur Curmica, Nurriats is important for the authorship of the early
Rosicrucian documents. It provides, moreover, a graphic picture of the
parlous condition into which German alchemy had fallen, or of the repute in
which it was held at the beginning of the seventeenth century. For example,
the makers of false books are compelled to affirm that their lucubrations
“ sold so mightily that whoever had no other means to maintain himself was
fain to engage in this cozenage.” As part of the sentence there is published
also a proclamation of the King’s Majesty, in the course of which it is stated
that he has “ resolved to communicate shortly ” a “ CaraLocur or Heretics
or Inpex Expurcarorius,” recalling the promise of the Fama, that the
Brotherhood will “ name in due season” those books and pictures which
are “set forth in contumeliam glorig Dei” and “will give to the pure-
hearted a record or register of the same.” There is little need to say
that no such Catalogue or Index is included among Rosicrucian publi-
Cations at any period. It should be added that pictorial symbols abound
in alchemical literature, including works of reputed Masters, like Basil
Valentine.

166

-- Page 195 --
The Chemical Nuptials

mitted to the marriage washed their hands and heads at
a certain fountain and were led back into the castle.
They had been invested already with the Golden Fleece
and a Lion volant, being counselled to maintain the repute
and dignity of that Order which royal favour had deigned
to confer upon them. A page was set apart for each guest,
and they were taken to visit various portions of the building.
In this manner, by an apparent mistake of his guide,
C..R..C.. was permitted to examine a certain royal
sepulchre, and there it is claimed that he learned more than
is extant in all books.1 He was ushered, moreover, into
a very noble library,? “as it was altogether before the
reformation.” In fine he had experience in a kind of
camera obscura, wherein he was able to contemplate the
stars “‘ glittering in an agreeable order” and “ moving so
gallantly ” that—as it seemed to him—he could have
looked for ever. It fell out for these reasons that he
was almost the last at table when the party was called
to supper, yet the waiters treated him with so much
“reverence and honour ” that he dared not look up for
shame.

The Virgin presided,® and the discourse was cheered
by enigmas and counter-enigmas.* The meat being finished
and grace said in due order, the President asked whether
they “desired to begin the wedding,” and there is no

1 It is said that in contiguity to this sepulchre there stood a glorious
Pheenix, about which Christian Rosy Cross had published a small discourse
two years previously. ‘There will be occasion to consider this testimony in
my next chapter.

* ‘The romance explains why there is no account of its contents—namely,
because the “ catalogue is shortly to be published.”

3 Virgo Luctfera is also described as the Lady Chamberlain. On this
occasion she wore the insignia of the Golden Fleece and Lion.

4 One of the riddles concerned the name of the Virgin and ran as follows :
“ My name contains six and fifty, yet has only eight letters. The third is a
third part of the fifth, which added to the sixth will produce a number, the
root whereof shall exceed the third by the first precisely, and it is the half of
the fourth. The fifth and seventh are equal ; so are the last and first. These

167

-- Page 196 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

need to testify concerning their zeal. A page was therefore
despatched and a procession of virgins entered with lights
carried before them, chief among whom was one wearing
a coronet and “ looking towards heaven rather than earth.”
She was mistaken by all for the bride, whom it is said that
she much surpassed in honour, riches and state. In a word,
it was she who would rule the whole Marriage.1 The com-
pany of guests fell on their knees before her, but she offered
her hand to each, admonishing them to remember their
Creator and so proceed in their enterprise. But to Christian
Rosy Cross she uttered these memorable words: “Thou
hast received more than others; make therefore a larger
return.” After this the procession turned about and the
guests were so led into another chamber, but each
in fine to his own apartment, that which was assigned to
C..R..C.. being furnished royally with rare tapestries
and paintings.

The proceedings of the Fourth Day began at a Fountain
in the Garden. The Lion of the Garden was beside it
and a tablet inscribed strangely recited the virtues of the
water, which had become a healing medicine by the aid
of Art. The counsel was therefore: “ Let him drink of
me who is able: let him who will, wash; let him trouble me
who dares.” And again: “Drink, Brethren, and live.”
make with the second as much as the sixth has, and this contains four more
than the third tripled.” The hidden Name was

Lon

C= 3. Three—as will be seen—is the value of the third letter,

H= 8 being one-third of nine, the value of the fifth letter, Add

I= 9 9 to 13=value of fifth and sixth letter, and the result is

M=13 22=4, which exceeds the third=3 by the first==1. The

AS 9 fifth and seventh are both 9, while the first and last are one.
56

* She is called Virgo prestans in the marginalia of the romance and also
the Duchess or Queen.

168

-- Page 197 --
The Chemical Nupitials
The guests washed at this Fountain and drank also thereof
out of a golden cup; but it does not appear that any great
renovation followed. Thereafter a certain door was
opened, and the Virgin Guide of the Paths led them up
three hundred and sixty-five stairs, following a band of
musicians, till they paused under a painted arch and were
joined by a notable train of maidens, apparelled richly.
The musicians were dismissed ; a bell rang; and another
most beautiful virgin brought wreaths and branches of
laurel, which were presented to the guests and the ladies
by whom they had been joined—as it might be, unto each
visitor his proper dedicated maid. A curtain was then
drawn up, and they beheld the King and Queen, as they
sat in their majesty in a room gleaming with gold and
precious stones! C..R..C.. bears witness that the
Queen’s robes were so radiant that he was not able to behold
them. The Virgo Lucifera, who presided over the pro-
ceedings, presented the guests to that royal pair as those
who had adventured thither “‘ with peril of body and life.”
They were received joyfully and grace was assured to all.
As regards the royal persons, the description baffles the
reader. We have seen concerning their state, majesty and
in particular the vestment of the Queen. But we are told
subsequently that at the western end of the room there
were three thrones and two seated in each of them: in
the first a very ancient king, whose consort was fair and
young; in the third a black king, of middle age, and by him
“‘a dainty old matron, covered with a veil”; but in the
middle sat “the two young persons, wearing wreaths of
jaurel,” while “ over them hung a great and costly crown.”
These were the two lovers, and about them was a Cupid,
- 1 The Latin marginalia of the text describes the vestibule of this chamber
and the throne-room itself as Jaboratorium, to intimate that the whole
pageant of the nuptials concealed—ex hypothesi—an experiment in secret
chemistry.
169

-- Page 198 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
who also flitted from point to point, tormenting all and
sundry.

The guests were led forth, after the formal presentation,
and C..R..C.. records that the youthful royal pair were
not at that time so beautiful as he had imagined previously
to himself. In a later period of that day the guests were
present at a comedy—which was attended also by the
royalties—in what is called the House of the Sun. ‘There
also was that ‘* unknown Queen ” who has been named pre-
viously and is to be distinguished from Virgo Lucifera.
The latter was President and Guide of the guests at large ;
the former ruled, as we know, over all that concerned the
Hermetic Marriage.1 The play-scene over, its spectators
returned to the throne-room, where the evening feast
was prepared, and the royal persons sat down to it in glit-
tering, snow-white garments. Notwithstanding the sallies
of Cupid, it was, however, a feast of sorrow, fulfilled for
the most part in silence. When it was finished, a book
——covered with black velvet and gold—was brought to
the young king, and this he laid open. By the royal com-
mand, an elder of the castle demanded whether the guests
were resolved to abide by the King, for better, for worse,
and all consenting wrote themselves down in the book,
after which the whole company—from the first even to
the last—drank the Draught of Silence, like a pledge taken
in any House of the Mysteries.

The cloud on the sanctuary of the festival was to be
explained speedily, for a bell began to toll; the royal
personalities put off their white garments and assumed
those of mourning ; the guests also were clothed in black ;
and the room was draped in like manner. The tables were

1 The House of the Sun was entered in processional form, thus: (1) The
Unknown Queen ; (2) Six Virgins carrying “the King’s jewels’; (3) the
Three Kings, having the Bridegroom in the midst of them; (4) the Three
Queens; (5) the Guests and their Virgins ; (6) One who is called “ Old
Atlas ” and otherwise the Astronomer.

170

-- Page 199 --
The Chemical Nuptials

removed and the place of banqueting was changed into
a place of holocaust. The Virgin President of the Mystery
bound the eyes of the six royalties with black taffeta
scarves, after which six coffins were brought in and set
down, with a low black seat in their midst. A giant negro
entered with naked axe and proceeded in a solemn and
reverent ceremony to decapitate the kings and queens—
male and female indifferently. This terrific pageant began
with the ancient monarch, who—so far as alchemy is
concerned—may possibly have represented Saturn. ‘The
king, who was of a middle age, may correspond to Jupiter,
and he suffered in the next place, each presumably with his
royal consort. ‘The king who was to come, for as yet he
does not seem to have been crowned, must have repre-
sented Sol, and I take it that he was last in the sacrifice.
The business had been done expeditiously but there was to
be yet another episode, for when the headsman prepared to
retire he was added also to the shambles. The blood of the
kings was received in golden goblets, which were placed
with them in their coffins, and these were duly covered.
As regards the executioner, his head was deposited with
the axe in a certain chest. Christian Rosy Cross adds—not
without warrant—that it seemed to him a bloody wedding.
But the Lady President bade her auditors rest content, for
the life of the victims stood now in the hands of the guests
and, if they followed her, “ this death should make many
alive.”

The guests meanwhile were counselled to seek their
repose, for the business of the fourth day was over, and
her own part was a vigil beside the bodies. Their
respective pages conducted the visitors presently to their
proper lodgings. ‘The room of C..R..C.. had windows
looking on to the lake, and about midnight—he being far
from sleep—there was a great glow over the water, and
he beheld from afar “seven ships making forward, all

I7I

-- Page 200 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

full of lights.” Over each of them hovered a flame,
which he judged to be “ the spirits of the beheaded.”
When the vessels had come to land he saw the Queen-
President! going towards them, bearing a torch and
followed by the six coffins, as also the chest. Each of
these was laid secretly in a ship; the lights were
extinguished, save one for a watch on each vessel; and
the spiritual flames “ passed back together over the lake.”
It is said that there were hundreds of watchers encamped
on the shore; but as for the Virgin she returned to the
castle and carefully bolted up.

Very early in the morning, being that of the Fifth Day,
C..R..C.. rose up, and—seeing that no one was stirring
—he entreated his page to take him about the castle.
In this manner he visited the Royal Treasury, in which
--out of common expectation—he found a noble
“sepulchre,” or rather a triangular monument. “Here,”
said his page, “‘ lies buried the Lady Venus, whose beauty
has undone so many in fortune, honour and blessing.”
He led him therefrom, through a copper door, far down
into the earth to another chamber, wherein was a rich bed,
hung about with curious curtains. The page drew one
of them, and—looking even beneath the coverlets—they
saw the Lady Venus in the incredible beauty of her naked-
ness. ‘This was a most secret visitation and there was
trouble afterwards to keep it in the place of hiddenness,
above all from Cupid, as jealous of his mother’s honour.
Indeed he heated his dart when he found Christian Rosy
Cross in proximity to the so-called sepulchre and pricked
him with it on the hand.

* Alternatively, Virgo Lucifera. The text says merely “ our Virgin.”

® We hear also of an “ unknown tree,” the fruit of which fell into a
copper kettle and was turned into water ; but the heat of burning pyrites
caused it to produce new fruit continually. It is said that when the tree
s Kee down, “then shall Lady Venus awake and become the mother of

172

-- Page 201 --
The Chemical Nuptials
But there was now other business to transact and the
President appeared in black velvet with her virgins, whom
the guests followed into the court before the Castle. They
came upon six coffins, by each of which stood eight muffled
men. ‘The guests generally supposed that they contained
the bodies of the kings and their consorts, but C..R..C..
remembered what he had seen upon the lake. The coffins
were borne into the Garden, where a “ wooden edifice ”
had been erected, standing upon seven columns and having
“a glorious crown” in the roof. Within this structure
were six sepulchres built over six graves, wherein the
coffins were laid, the chest containing the head of the
executioner being put in the middle of all. After the
interment was over the Virgin exhorted the guests (1) to
keep their engagements faithfully ; (2) not to repine at their
pains; (3) to be helpful in restoring the Royal Persons
to life; with which object (4) they must accompany her
to the Tower of Olympus and bring thence the medicines
required for this purpose. They repaired therefore to
the shore and found the seven ships, in three of which the
Virgin arranged her party; whereupon the voyage began,
with the ships in due order, as shewn in the following
diagram.
1
ie
att at ark
ot
*f
The distribution was as here follows, according to the
numbers of the ships :
(1) The Moor or Negro, and twelve musicians ; (2), (3),
+ “ Herewith were my companions deceived,” says the supposititious
C..R..C.., “ for they imagined that the dead bodies were there.”
173

-- Page 202 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
(4) the guests at the Wedding, Christian Rosy Cross being
an occupant of No. 3, together with the Lady President;
(5), (6) having no passengers, but “ stuck about with many
branches of laurel”; (7) Forty Virgins in all.

The ships sailed over the lake and then through a narrow
arm into the open sea, amidst sirens and sea-goddesses,
chanting the victories of Love. After some hours the
voyagers reached a four-square island, on which was the
Tower of Olympus, by wall within wall environed. They
were greeted by the Warden, described as “‘ a very ancient
man,” and led into} a subterranean laboratory, where they
extracted the essences from plants and precious stones,
receiving at the end of these labours some scant refresh-
ment, and a mattress laid on the floor for each to rest as
he could. But Christian Rosy Cross went out to contem-
plate the stars,and from one of the walls he beheld not
only a memorable conjunction of planets, but the Seven
Spiritual Flames passing from over the sea to rest on the
summit of the Tower. After this manner the fifth day
came to an end in wonders.

Of that which followed on the Sixth it is scarcely possible
to speak in a summary manner, as it is exceedingly involved.
Above the subterranean laboratory the Tower of Olympus
was raised in eight stages or storeys, and—so far as the Guests
were concerned—access from storey to storey was through
a trap opened in the ceiling. Some performed the ascent
by the help of wings which the Warden fastened to their
shoulders; to others ladders were given, e.g., to Christian
Rosy Cross ; while ropes were distributed to the rest and
fastened on hooks in the ceiling.

To the seven floors there were allotted seven stages of
work, the particulars of which follow: (1) The laborious
experiment of ascent from the laboratory or first conclave

1In such a manner, says the text, that the coffins were brought in without
observation on the part of the visitors.

174

-- Page 203 --
The Chemical Nuptials

to the second or floor above. (2) A period of prayer therein
for the life of the King and Queen, performed in separate
oratories, after which a great oval chest was brought in,
containing the six royal bodies, and was placed beneath
a fountain, the waters of which were shut off at the begin-
ning. The Virgin 1 entered, bearing a casket, in which was
the Moor’s head. Her attendants carried lamps, and torches
were given to the Guests, all present being gathered about
the chest. The Moor’s head, covered with green tatteta,
was placed in a kettle and the liquid essences prepared
on the previous day from plants and precious stones were
poured therein. The fountain played, and its water was
delivered through small pipes into a smaller kettle, heated
by the lamps of the attendants. So far as it is possible to
understand a confused text, the contents of both kettles
“fell in upon the bodies” and dissolved them. ‘The
liquid formed thus by the bodies was received in a golden
globe, which became exceedingly heavy and was taken
out of the chamber with great labour. Thereafter the
Guests ascended as they could to the third conclave.
(3) They found the golden globe suspended from a strong
chain midwise in this apartment, which contained many
windows, with polished mirrors between them, “ so optic-
ally opposed ” to one another that the image of the sun,
shining through one window, was multiplied everywhere
and refracted upon the golden globe, which was thus
raised gradually to a desired state of heat. The mirrors were
then shut off and the globe was left to cool, after which
it was cut open with a diamond and a great snow-white
egg was discovered therein. This was carried away by the
Virgin, and after a certain space of time the Guests ascended
in the same miscellaneous manner to the fourth floor.
(4) They discovered herein a great copper kettle, exactly

1 She is called “‘ our Virgin,” but was presumably the President of the
Work and not Virgo Luctfera,

175

-- Page 204 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
square in shape, filled with silver sand, having the egg
deposited therein, that it might be brought to perfect
maturity by a gentle fire, kindled beneath the vessel. The
said condition being reached and the egg removed, a Bird
with black plumes broke through the shell and was fed
with the blood of the beheaded kings and queens—but
diluted with prepared water. It grew in the sight of all,
the black feathers being replaced by others of snow-white,
and afterwards by yet others, so curiously coloured that
there was nothing like them for beauty. In this state the
Bird was carried away by the Virgin, and the Guests
ascended presently to the fifth floor. (5) The work was
now concerned with the bath of the Bird. He was placed
in a vessel of water “so coloured with a fine white powder
that it had the appearance of milk.” The vessel was heated
by lamps placed beneath till the Bird’s feathers came off
and the water was turned blue, looking afterwards even
as a blue stone. This stone was pounded and the Bird
painted therewith, the head only excepted, “ which re-
mained white.” The Virgin departed with her Bird, and
the Guests were thereafter called up to the sixth storey.
(6) In this place the Bird was fed with the blood of a white
serpent and then decapitated, the body being burnt to
ashes, which were deposited in a box of cypress-wood.
Christian Rosy Cross and three of the other workers were
driven out at this stage by the door on the pretence that
they had proved idlers ; but in reality they were led up a
staircase to the eighth floor, while those who were left
behind ascended to the seventh. (7) The chosen three were
welcomed by an ancient Warden of the Tower, to whom
entered the Virgin and deposited the ashes of the Bird
in another vessel, after which she departed to “cast a
mist before the eyes of the remaining artists.”
1 They were apparently set to work in maintaining a furnace and believed
that they were much preferred before the other ill-starred guests. A little
176

-- Page 205 --
The Chemical Nuptials

The work of the triad was to moisten the ashes with pre-
pared water till they became a thin dough, which was then
heated over the fire and cast “into two little forms or
moulds,” where it was left to cool. Subsequently the
moulds were opened, discovering “‘ two bright and almost
transparent little images, a male and a female, the like to
which man’s eye never saw.” ‘They were “limber and
fleshy as other human bodies,” but had as yet no life within
them. Now, the blood of the Bird had been received
into a golden cup, and the next duty was to instil it drop
by drop into the mouths of the little images which, under
this ministration, continued to increase in size; and when
all the blood was exhausted, “ they were in their perfect
full growth, having gold-yellow curled hair.” Their flesh
was now of a lively, natural colour, though they were still
“dead figures.” They were veiled by command of the
Warden, and in that which followed the Guests had noshare.
Moreover, the intention on the part of the official dramatis
persone was that they should see and understand little. The
actors included the Virgin and her attendants. That which
took place was the entrance of the souls into their bodies
through tubes placed in the mouths, an event which was
seen and understood clearly by Christian Rosy Cross alone.
He testifies that the souls descended through an open space
in the vaulted roof, after the mantier of streams of fire poured
through the tubes, and thence into the two bodies. This
operation or ceremonial was performed three times, after
which the now living bodies were placed in a “ travelling
bed” and curtains drawn about them. They were left to
sleep in this manner for a considerable time, but were ulti-
later on, their satisfaction was increased because they had “ to work in gold,”
of which it is said that it belongs indeed to the art but is not chief and most
necessary therein. They had also part of the Bird’s ashes and imagined
therefore that the dead bodies would be raised up to new life by means of
gold. Owing probably to a lapsus memoria, the story does not relate what

happened when the two classes of artists were ultimately reunited.

N 177

-- Page 206 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
mately awakened by Cupid, were vested by the Virgin in white
garments and seated in certain very curious chairs, where they
received the congratulations of all present.? It is said that the
young King and Queen “imagined that they had slept from
the hour in which they were beheaded.” In fine the royal
personages were escorted to the waterside, where a ship was
waiting and presently put forth to sea, the guests proceeding to
supper and thence to rest for the night, after their long toils.

On the morning of the Seventh and last day the guests
were clothed in yellow garments and golden fleeces, the
Virgin declaring that they were Knights of the Golden
Stone. Each of them received also a golden medal,
bearing the following inscriptions: on the obverse—
Ars Nature Ministra; on the reverse—Temporis Natura
Fila. The company returned across the sea in twelve
ships, under the care of the old lord. There were guards of
honour on board, together with many musicians, and the
ships’ flags carried the twelve zodiacal signs, the guests
sitting under Libra. As they drew to the mainland a great
fleet came out to meet them, including one vessel which
sparkled with gold and precious stones : it carried the King
and Queen, with many lords and ladies of high degree.
All were brought to, and then Atlas—on the deck of the
royal vessel—welcomed the arrivals in the King’s name.
The harbour reached and all in fine landed, the King and
Queen presented their hands; the guests were mounted
on horses ; the old lord and Christian Rosy Cross were caused
to ride with the King, who saluted the latter as his father.®

4 There is no suggestion that their extraordinary ordeal had transformed
them in any visible manner, nor does any purpose appear to have been served
thereby,

® Of which we were ignorant heretofore, says the text in its most banal
Manner.

8 The reason not emerging in the course of the story, which indeed
represents Christian Rosy Cross as chief and most observant, as obviously
most favoured among the seven guests, but allocates the vital part of the
work to the Lady-President and her coadjutors.

178

-- Page 207 --
The Chemical Nuptials

They reached the first palace-gate, the keeper of which
—with whom C..R..C.. had exchanged his flask of
water against a golden token—now presented a petition,
begging him to intercede with the King on his behalf.
In this manner it transpired that he was a famous astrologer
who had been guilty of a misdemeanour against Venus
by beholding her in her bed of rest, as a punishment for
which he had been put to serve at the door until such time
as one who had transgressed in like manner should take
his place. It follows that the petitioner was actually in
the presence of his successor and appealing as if unawares
to him. Moreover, when the document came to be read
later on in the proceedings, it certified that “ Venus was
already uncovered”’ by one of the King’s guests. There
was much perturbation in consequence, which notwith-
standing a great feast followed in the palace, and then the
new Knights of the Golden Stone were pledged to observe
the following Laws of the Chivalry1: (1) That they
should ascribe the Order only to God and His hand-maid
Nature. (2) That they should abominate all uncleanness.
(3) That they should be ready to assist all worthy persons
who had need of them. (4) That the honour conferred
upon them should not be applied to works of worldly
pride and ambition. (5) That they should not desire to
live longer than God willed. They were installed Knights
thereafter, and “set over ignorance, poverty and sickness,
to handle them ” at their pleasure.

It is said that Christian Rosy Cross hung up his golden
fleece and hat in the chapel of the Order, as an eternal
memorial. Moreover, as each was required to write his
name—in a register, presumably—he set down on his own

1 It is obvious therefore that the romance is concerned with the Order
of the Golden Stone and not of the Rosy Cross. It is merely incidental that
the narrator happens—as his name suggests—to be already a Brother of the
Red Rosy Cross. The distinction is important and will call for further
consideration in the next chapter.

179

-- Page 208 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

part as follows: Summa Scientia nihil scire : FR. Curisti-
anus Rosencreutz, Eques Auret Lapidis. Anno 1459. In
fine, a royal reward had been adjudged to each, and each
was called upon to prefer his request in private. But
Christian Rosy Cross decided on his own part to ask for
the release of the doorkeeper, which involved a confession
of his own vision of Venus on the fifth day of the Marriage.
The King told him that he could not “ transgress his
ancient usage,” which appeared to signify that C-.R..C..
must take his predecessor’s place at the gate, notwithstand-
ing the intimations of the story, that it was chiefly through
his offices that the royal personages had been brought
again to life.

He was told, indeed, that this was the last time when he
should see the King as he now looked upon him, meaning
as a guest at the palace. The King took him in his arms and
kissed him, and he was committed to the Divine Protection,
all of which he regarded as a form of dismissal. However,
the Lord of the Tower and he who bore the mythological
title of Atlas, conducted him to “a glorious lodging, in
which stood three beds.” ‘The last lines specify that “ each
of us lay down in one of them,” at which point the narrative
closes abruptly in the midst of a sentence, the following
statement being added by way of colophon: “ Here are
wanting about two leaves in quarto, and he (the author
hereof), whereas he imagined he must in the morning be
doorkeeper, returned home.”

The German occult mind of 1616 concluded that Christian
Rosy Cross had attained the secret of the Hermetic Magnum
Opus, had performed the transmutation of metals with his
own hands and had elected to put on record the particulars,
including the process, in the guise of an exceedingly
picturesque allegorical romance. The promises of Fama
Frarerniratis had not been fulfilled in the ConFessi0o ;
but there is, I suppose, no question that the publication

180

-- Page 210 --
The Chemical Nuptials

of Nupria Cuymic# must have raised expectation and
desire to a fever-heat—at least on the part of the alchemists.+
It did not go through so many editions as the two previous
tracts, and there was no pretence—as we have seen—
of its translation into other languages than the German
in which it was written. I do not think—or at least
have been unable to trace—that it had even the honour
of a Dutch rendering; but more than one laborious
commentary unfolded its hidden meaning. For reasons
which will appear in the next chapter it is unnecessary
to do more than specify therein by title one of these
hermeneutical experiments. The question before us
is not that of significance but of the tract in respect
of its origin: it so happens that the settlement of this point
will dispose effectually of the other.

For the rest, the position of Nupria Cuymic on its
open surface is—as I have indicated—that of an allegorical
romance or parable woven about the legendary Founder
of the Order, and it does not contain as such any further
contribution to Rosicrucian history. At most it illustrates
the alleged fact that C.-.R..C.. attained the ends of
alchemy. In reality it embodies an exposition at length
of the claim made in the two previous manifestoes that
the Adept Brethren were in possession, through the work
of their Master, of that Great Secret which is summarised
in the Conrgssio as “ transmutation of metals and the
supreme medicine of the world.”

1 Compare Findel: Husrory or Fresmasonry: ‘The beautiful
embellishment of the subject in THe CuemrcaL Nuptiats caused the desire
for initiation to be increased everywhere, especially in the Rhine country,
which was the chief seat of the Society.” Reghellini says also in his loose
and inaccurate manner that “the taste for occult sciences and theosophy on
the part of the R..R..0M..5%.. is to be found permeating various German
works, which made a considerable stir, especially in England.” The history
of occult thought in England is against this view. Reghellini adds that the
works in question were the Cuemicat Nupriats or Rosen-Crux (sic) and the
UniversaL RerorMaTIoNn OF THE WHoLe Wor p, by Valentine Andrez,

181

-- Page 211 --
CHAPTER VII
AUTHORSHIP OF THE CHEMICAL NUPTIALS

In the year 1614, when the Fama Frarerniratis created
its first public sensation, a young man named Johann Valentin
Andrez, who has been already the subject of more than
a single allusion, had attained the age of twenty-eight years,
having been born at Herrenberg in Wiirtemberg on
August 17, 1586. The family appears to have been rich in
theologians and Lutheran pastors. His immediate pro-
genitor belonged to the second category and his grand-
father, Jacob Andreas, has been called famous in divinity,
while an uncle James is said to have been known through
all Germany as asecond Luther. Johann Valentin received
the elements of his education under a certain Michael
Beumler? and afterwards at Tubingen, in connection
with which we hear of Martinus Crusius,? the preceptor
of Simon Studion, but without mention of the latter.*

According to Hofelius, Andrez fell into bad company at
Tubingen, squandering some years of his youth and leaving
the university in 1610, full of repentance and hoping to
recuperate by travel. This stands at its value and is not
exactly borne out in the confessions of his autobiography.
In any case he travelled, in and around the year 1610,

1 Joannis Vatentini ANDRE VITA, AB IPSO CONSCRIPTA, 1849. Printed
ex autographo in Bibl, Guelferbytano recondito, adsumtis Codd. Stuttgartianis,
Schorndorhenst, Tubingensi.

2 Ibid., pp. 8, 9.

3 Tt seems possible that Studion was an assumed name, though I find no
such suggestion in any of the past records.

182

-- Page 212 --
Authorship of the Chemical Nupuals
visiting Switzerland, France, Austria! and Italy. In 1614
he married Agnes Elizabeth, who was a daughter of
Joshua Griininger. The successive appointments which
he held as a minister of the Lutheran Church need not
detain us. In 1620 he became superintendent of Calva and
filled this office for nearly twenty years. In 1654 he died
at Stuttgart on the eve of accepting the post of prelate at
Adelberg.

There is one other point only in respect of his external
life. Having been accused of heresy and of defending the
Rosicrucian Fraternity, he issued his profession of faith,
certifying his detestation of papal tyranny, the pride of
Calvinism, the hypocrisy of Anabaptists and registering
his adhesion to the Confession of Augsbourg. The Rosi-
crucian impeachment appears to have been passed over,
but the connection with the Order which is implied in the
charge against him happens to be our sole concern. It
takes us at once to his literary output, which was large
enough in its way, consisting of numberless little books
written in Germanised Latin, with little grace of diction
through all their pomp of pages. I conclude that
they have been praised in proportion as they have
been read the less by those who have pronounced
their panegyric. It has been said that he devoted his
learning, talents and imagination to direct his contempor-
aries into the true path, being that of Bible Christianity.
There is no room for doubt ; but men of God or men of
the Devil, they were one and all an impossible crowd—
these literati and theologi and philosophi, in their sacro-
saintly fatherland of the early seventeenth century, agaze

1 This is the fact which lies behind the muddled thesis of Heckethorn,
according to which Andree established “ Rosicrucian Lodges” in Austria
™ 2 Compare De Quincey, following and reproducing Bithle: “ Besides
Greek and Latin, in which languages he was distinguished for the elegance
of his style,” etc. etc.

183

-- Page 213 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

and clamorous in the aftermath of the garish light of
Luther. Whether it is possible or not to say anything in
la grande maniére of literature which shall take people who
are disposed into a path of Bible Christianity I do not
pretend to know: what is certain, however, is that it was
never said by Andrez. His books—with a single exception
which is a thorn in the flesh of my subject—are dull with
a dullness which surpasses all vexation.1 One of them has
been translated recently, and those who challenge my
ruling are in a position to estimate for themselves the price
they might be prepared to pay for deliverance from the
yoke of his Curistian Repusiic, supposing that the world
were debating its own reconstruction along such lines as
his.

I do not question of course that in his day and generation
he was a shining light in Lutheran letters and theology :
it is the theology and the letters which no light can en-
lighten and no Confession can redeem—of Augsburg or
otherwhere—either in this world or that which is to come.
The sin of Luther and the rest of the German Reformers
was not their revolt against the Papacy, but their substitu-
tion of a religion of lead. It was ingots of lead on the eye-
lids and lead in the heart and head for the generation which
came after and held up cudgels of debate “as a challenge
to all the field.” It follows that Andre et hoc genus omne
were products of their period—infelices theologi—exponents
of a chaotic reform. They are forgotten now, when there
is no dew of Protestant praises to keep green their dejected
memory. Iam not suggesting that Andrez fell below the
better measures of his period: he may rank high in its
classes ; but there remains the irrepealable platitude of the

1 Compare therefore Bruckeri Historia Critica Philosophie, Tomus II,
P. 740. It registers that Andrez was very learned and a very elegant
genius. Other deponents speak of his satirical powers and even of his wit.
I would persuade the modern reader to draw, if he dare, a few drafts from
that Castalian fount in dereliction which is called Vira AB IPSO CONSCRIPTA.

184

-- Page 214 --
Authorship of the Chemical Nuptals
whole subject—that dullness is still dullness and that its
deeps are still the deeps.

There must now be placed before my readers—I mean,
those who are otherwise unversed in the subject—an
almost incredible proposition, and it is one which cannot
be dismissed, unhappily for the romance and mystery-side
of the Rosy Cross. With all its banners and pennons, its
virgins and light-bearers, its palaces and towers, its astro-
logical ship sailing over Hermetic seas, its transformations
and resurrections in parable, its Eguites Aurei Laptdts
and intimations above all concerning the Red Rosy Cross,
the author of the Cuemicat Nupriats was no other and
more concealed genius than Johannes Valentinus Andrez.
It is true that the testimony is his own and is not only
devoid of all contemporary support but—so far as I am
aware—of all suspicion of the fact. But in Vira aB IPso
conscriPpTA, already cited, he registers the point, as one
speaking in humility concerning a youthful indiscretion,
of which he was almost ashamed.! He is reciting his early
literary efforts belonging to the period circa 1602 and 1603,
in which he had attained the respective ages of sixteen and
seventeen years.?- Though enumerated in Latin, it seems
fairly certain that most of them were written in German,
as their author’s native tongue. They included (1) the
Comedies of Estuer and Hyacintu;? (2) THe Cursine
oF Venus; (3) certain Dialogues, to the number of three,
under the title of Trars;4 and (4) THe Cuemicat Nup-

1 Solomon Semler did not know the Vrra, which was still unprinted in his
day. He affirms that the Cuemrca, Nuptiats was written by Caspar
Rosencreutz, a man of learning, otherwise unknown, but there was also a
Christian Rosencreutz. Exucrparrus Mayor and Exuciparius CuEmicus,
1617, were written to combine their legends.

2 Fam a secn do etuteteio post millesimum sexcentissimum ceperam aliquid
exercendi inergo rpgentiangre.

3 As to what remained of these at the time of writing, he says: pro
@tate non displicet. They were imitations of English comedies.

‘ The description is: Lacurym# tribus dialogis satis prolixis. It is

possible that these Dialogues were in Latin.
185

-- Page 215 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

Tiats. As to the Diatocuss he says that invito me
perierunt; but as to Nuptim Cuymica, the annotation is
superfuerunt e contra. ‘They perished but this survived,
“ with its foetus fruitful of monsters.” It is described
as a jest—that is to say, ludibrium—and Andrezx sup-
poses that his readers will be astonished to hear of
its being esteemed by some and explained with subtle
ingenuity.1

The autobiography from which these excerpts are taken
was written late in life, and we cannot do otherwise than
accept the statement made, for it might be unreasonable to
suppose that Andrez advanced a false claim, after the
lapse of long years, were he even capable of sucha dishonesty,
which I am quite sure that he was not.? There would be
nothing to gain by assuming such a mask, and, moreover,
the publication of his memoirs during his life-time was
probably not intended. As a fact they remained in manu-
script for one hundred and forty-two years and were issued
even then only in a German version.? The original Latin

1 His note-books had records of yet other productions, e.g. Juxuus,
otherwise Poziria, in three books, and AsTROLOGICAL JUDGMENT AGAINST
Astrotocy, the latter indicating his bent against the occult sciences at that
early age. They contain, however, no reference to a tract on the Phoenix.
Had such a performance been included among his Juveni11a, it would have
helped us to understand the statement made in Nuptrm Cuymic#@ about a
work on this subject having been published by Christian Rosy Cross two
years prior to the marriage. Otherwise it remains inscrutable. The
Pheenix is a familiar alchemical symbolism and has been said to recur
frequently in Rosicrucian literature, which, however, is not the case.

? In my Reau Hisrory or roe Rosicrucians, 1888, p. 231, I indicated
that Nupri Cuymica was incredible as a boyish effort. The difficulties
which I felt then remain now; but I am conscious at this day that it is at
least equally difficult to suggest that Andrez lied in his testamentary memoirs.
I have taken therefore in the text above what seems to me the better part
and have preferred the honour of a long departed theologian before the
validity of a literary judgment, however strong in itself, I think also that
the place of the romance in Rosicrucian debate can be assigned more easily
by accepting its author’s statement.

* They appeared in 1796 in Seybold’s collection of AUTOBIOGRAPHIES OF
Ceresrarep Men.

186

-- Page 216 --
Authorship of the Chemical Nuptials

text did not appear till 1843.1 Evidently he regretted the
romance, as shewn by the allusion to a brood of monstros-
ities which were begotten thereby.2 We have therefore
to recognise that Andrez wrote in his teens a work called
Cuemicat Nupriats and in after years at least regarded it
as a jest, unless J may venture to render ludibrium as a
sufferable equivalent of “‘ fantasy.” ®

We have seen that THe Curemican MarriacE was
published in 1616, and it goes without saying that it had
all the appearance of a third Rosicrucian manifesto. There
is no question that it was taken as such by the rank and file

1 Vira az reso Conscripta, already cited.

2 In his Pronaos or THE TEMPLE oF THE Rosicrucians, Dr. Franz
Hartmann says that Andree wrote THe Cuemican Nurtiazs at Tiibingen
in 1602 and (read or) 1603—or prior to the completion of Naomerria—and
states in his autobiography that ‘he intended to give a true picture of the
follies of that time.” No such testimony is borne. The full passage is as
follows: Superfuerunt e contra Nuptie Chymice, cum monstrorum feecundo
foetu, ludibrium, quod mireris a nonullis estimatum et subtili indagine
explicatum, plane futile et quod inanitatem curiosorum prodat. This has been
loosely translated: “ After them ”—i.e. the Dialogues of Lacuryma@—
“ came CuemicaL Nupriats, teeming with fanciful monstrosities: a playful
delusion, which you may wonder by some was esteemed truthful, and
interpreted with much erudition, foolishly enough, and to shew the empti-
ness of the learned.” It is obvious that an alchemical romance, whether
written in jest or earnest, is not calculated to exhibit a picture of the time,
though a romance written on the subject would indicate that alchemy was
in vogue. I have rendered cum monstrorum fecundo fetu “with its fetus
fruitful of monsters,” as one who offers a literal meaning crudely. ‘“'Teeming
with fanciful monsters” is paraphrase rather than translation and inexact
even as such. The meaning of the Latin clause is that Andree’s juvenile
book of wonders proved a prolific source of other ridiculous inventions—
e.g., alchemical commentaries thereon. The passage in any case does not
signify an allusion to two works: (1) THe Cuemicat Marariace and (2) some
other production, not named by its title but described as begetting a brood
of nightmares—e.g., the Fama. As one instance of the alchemical commen-
taries see the anonymous Practica Lzonis Viripis, published in 1619 under
the initials C. V. M. V. S. For the rest, it is obvious that the Marriacs,
published in 1616, did not produce the Fama of 1614 or Conressio of the
following year.

3 Compare p. 46 of the Vita and its reference ad Fraternitatem Christi
as formulated in his Inviratio and described as Ludibrio illi Rosicruciano
oppositam.

187

-- Page 217 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

of enthusiasts who had received Fama and Conressio into
their heart of hearts. Whether it was regarded seriously
by the better class of expositors on the defensive side may
be open to question. It is significant, at least, that it was
never mentioned by Maier, among the fervent German
apologists, and never by Robert Fludd. One must be
cautious about definite statements, but I do not remember
that it was a subject of either criticism or allusion on the
part of hostile writers—for example, Libavius. Com-
mentaries notwithstanding, it is probable that neither
class knew how to regard it, and it was avoided prudently by
both—notwithstaning the impression produced on the
German world of alchemy.

It is, however, of palmary importance on the historical
side. If it was produced by Andree in 1602 or 1603 as
an excursion in the world of fantasy, or otherwise as a kind
of hoax, to palm off on alchemists a mere boyish invention
as a thing of serious importance, it is to be observed that
his production remained in manuscript till he was nearly
twice the age at which it was written and that he published
it in 1616, unquestionably as a contribution to the Rosi-
crucian subject of debate. He did this either as one who
was working from within the circle out of which the
manifestoes came or as one who was without, acting on his
own initiative. In either case—according to his personal
testimony——it was jest, hoax or fantasy. I can understand
the ludibrium designation more easily by supposing that
he was without and that he issued Nuprim Cuymic& to
confuse the issues of debate. ‘The internal evidence of the
text lends colour to this speculation in a rather curious
way. The honour conferred therein on those who attended
the marriage was the Order of the Golden Stone, not of
the Rosy Cross. ‘To this they were bound, this and no
other they were pledged to maintain inviolable, subscribing
to its various laws. Nothing in the story itself arises out

188

-- Page 218 --
Authorship of the Chemical Nuptials

of the fact that it is told by Christian Rosy Cross ; nothing
again follows from the fact that he called himself a Brother
of an Order which bore his own name. So far as the story—
under the circumstances of its production—can be said to
have any sub-surface meaning, which is of course in pre-
tence only, it belongs to the literature of the Philosophical
Stone and takes its place as such among alchemical texts.
Supposing that Andree was not himself initiated—if I
may use such a term—however well he may have been
acquainted with those who were, and supposing that he
regarded then, as he certainly regarded afterwards, the
whole movement as a thing of folly, the fact that he had
in some pigeon-hole his boyish fantasia may have prompted
him to foist it on apologists and accusers as a priceless
contribution to the story of the mythical R..C.. founder.
To the words Cuymiscue Hocuzert—id est, Nupriez
Cuymic#—of the original title he added Christiani
Rosencreutz, with a few lines in the text,! and the trans-

1 J imagine that no one has realised previously the very slender connection
between the CuemicaL Maragiace and the Rosy Cross, outside the ascription
of its title and its reference to ungodly alchemical books, making use of
Divine Emblems. Let us see, however, what was actually done by Andrez if,
according to the hypothesis above, he converted it into a document of the
Order. (1) He represented C-.R..C.. as placing four roses in his hat when
he set out to attend the wedding. (z) At the Portal of the Hermetic Castle
he caused C..R.*.C.*. to describe himself as a Brother of the Red Rosy
Cross and to be greeted by his own name of Rosencreutz when his fellow-
alchemists accosted him. (3) Virgo Lucifera is made to ask C..R..C.. for
the roses in his hat. (4) At the triumphal return to the Hermetic Castle on
the seventh day, he and the Warden of the Tower ride with the young King,
each bearing a white ensign embroidered with a Red Cross. (5) However,
at the end of all C..R..C.. writes his name in the Chapel of the Knightly
Order to which he has been admitted, the inscription being Fr .. Christianus
Rosencreutz, not adding, however, In Ordine Rosee Crucis, but—on the
contrary: Eques Aurei Lapidis. It follows that Tue Cuemican Marriace
is inwardly, outwardly and only as if a memorial extracted from the chivalrous
archives of an Order of the Golden Stone, which was also arbitrarily con-
nected by the fact of its badge with the Order of the Golden Fleece. The
latter was instituted at Bruges in 1429 by Philip III, Duke of Burgundy, to
commemorate his marriage with Isabella, daughter of John, King of Portugal.

189

-- Page 219 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
formation was complete for his purpose. My suggestion
is that the original manuscript was interpolated to this
extent, that the additions thus made were quite unnecessary
to the text, the issues of which are indeed confused by the
introduction of matter belonging to the Rosy Cross. If
this hypothesis is justified, the later literary history of
Andree in connection with the Order falls into its logical
place. It has been pointed out that he never denied his
connection with the Rosy Cross, but his unwise act made
him the author of its third presumed official document,
being that also which was next to the first in apparent
consequence. He could not therefore deny, and the whole
truth he was apparently unwilling to tell; there were
alchemists of the period who might have turned to rend
him. Long after only—in the unpublished Vira—he
registered the bare fact of authorship at a period when the
subject seemed to all intents and purposes dead and done
with for the time being in Germany. The subsequent
publication of this memorial he bequeathed apparently to
future generations and the care of time and circumstances.
Meanwhile the issue of THe Curemicat Marriace anony-
mously in 1616 was followed presently by tracts of identical
authorship, whether issued or not under the name of
Andrez, in which his hostile and derisive opinion of the
Rosicrucian subject appears in unmistakable terms. The
Rosicrucian who was not a Rosicrucian, the alchemist
who was not an alchemist, the Lutheran theosophist who
had no part in the sciences called occult, no doubt repented
at his leisure of that which he had done in his haste.

Tt will be observed that my colourable hypothesis, thus
tentatively expressed, accounts in a natural manner for
the fact that Nupri= Cuymic#® was printed some thirteen
or fourteen years after it was written. But I will now take
the other side of the question and assume for a moment
that Andre was connected directly with the Rosicrucian

190

-- Page 220 --
Authorship of the Chemical Nuptials
movement, conspiracy or experiment, ab initio. He may
have founded the Order or been connected intimately
therewith as one of those who did; it may have existed
on paper, or he and his coadjutors may have incorporated
themselves. He may have written Fama and Conrsssio,
or he may not; but if not he was one—let us say—of
a close corporation from which those tracts emanated. For
the moment at least, mere questions of detail do not signify.
In any case he wrote Nuptr# Cuymic® when he was sixteen
or seventeen, and as I am abandoning for the time being
my previous speculation, I will set aside also for a moment
that which belongs thereto, the alleged interpolation of
this text for specific reasons on its publication in 1616.
Now it is obvious that allusions to an “‘ Order of the Red
Rosy Cross” in a work of Andree belonging to the year
1602 or 1603 and written then as a ludibrium imply one of
two things—either that having for the purposes of his
romance invented an alchemical Order of the Golden
Stone he added casually thereto, for no reason connected
with the story, another fictitious fraternity and that,
some ten or fourteen years later, it began to be heard of
in the world, issuing manifestoes concerning itself and
making great claims; or alternatively that such an institu-
tion was subsisting already in the hiddenness. On the
side of the first proposition there is whatever we may
choose to infer from the decorations which I have cited
already as worn by Christian Rosy Cross when he started
to attend the Marriage: (1) a blood-red ribbon, cross-wise
upon his shoulder, and (z) four red roses in his hat.

Now it so happens that the arms of Andre, were a St.
Andrew’s Cross, having a rose in each of the angles.! There
is nothing in the text to shew that C..R..C.. fixed any-

1 Wigston points out, in Bacon, SHAKESPEARE AND THE RosIcrucians,
that the name Andreas signifies Andrew, the patron saint of Scotland, to
which also belongs the St. Andrew’s Cross, embodied in the family arms,

1gI

-- Page 221 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
thing but an ordinary Calvary Cross to his shoulder, and
if Andree was borrowing from his own heraldic bearings
it is difficult to see why he dismembered these by placing
the roses in the hat of his hero, so the point stands at its
value, with perhaps little therein. But if, on the other
hand, in the year 1616 he added the Rosicrucian allusions to
his original draft, it was natural that he should interpret
the name of the Order in the light of his own armorial
device. On the side of the second proposition there is
whatever attaches to the symbolism of the Rose and Cross in
the Naomerria of Simon Studion, and we have seen that
this work has certain points of correspondence with the
Fama and Conressto. If, however, Studion can be said
to have founded anything it was the Militia Crucifera
Evangelica rather than the Rosy Cross, though the first
may have developed into the second or given birth thereto.
Now, there is evidence, as we shall see shortly, in Andrez’s
Tourris Basen that he did connect Studion with the Fra-
ternity of R..C.., though the allusion is rather indefinite ;
and this being the case, it has to be remembered that we
are not dealing with a casual deponent, putting speculations
on record, but with one who had means of first-hand
knowledge and unquestionably knew at first hand. He was
either acquainted personally with Martinus Crusius, the
preceptor of Studion at the University of Tiibingen, or
with survivors of that generation; he was acquainted
with Naometria—completed subsequently to his own
Nupriz Cuymic#—though it existed only in manuscript ;
and he exhausted language in the laudation of Tobias
Hess who was connected with Militia Crucifera Evangelica
and was apparently joined with its activities. It was the
comet of a season, for although the memorable ReperrorruM
says that it became a strong sect, we have no other record
concerning it; but it is probable that Andrez saw it
shine for its brief period in his precocious childhood and
192

-- Page 222 --
Authorship of the Chemical Nuptials
would remember 1604 when he was at Tiibingen or in the
society of Hess. In the last place, it is possible and not
unlikely that he knew Studion himself, though perhaps
under another and Germanic name. If the Rosicrucian
claims and legend were hatched under the wings of the
Militia he would be acquainted with the fact at least :
he was sufficiently in the hiddenness of the fact for anything
that was going on not to be veiled from him. But as there
is nothing to shew that he belonged to the Militia, so
there is no evidence that he was joined to any Rosicrucian
activities which may have emanated therefrom. Were it
otherwise, it would seem impossible to account on any
colourable hypothesis for the alleged fact that he wrote
Nurti# Cuymic#, containing Rosicrucian references, as
what he called a /udibrium, subsequently, or again for its
publication in the high tide of Rosicrucian controversy,
unless all the publications were part of a planned hoax.

Now this last thesis has been put forward, with much
care and elaboration, by Professor Biihle, whose considera-
tions on Simon Studion have been cited in my second
chapter. Both in Germany and among English writers,
here and in America, all hostile scholarship has followed
the lead of Bihle; but my position is that everything
which has been advanced under this aspect of the subject
calls to be unsaid. The thesis—made familiar enough by
De Quincey—can be summarised briefly thus. (1) That
Germany was a prey to enormous evils in the first quarter
of the seventeenth century—notwithstanding apparently
the great light of Lutheran Reformation and the lifting
of the Papal yoke. (2) That a cry for reform rose up there-’
fore on all sides, as for a second and greater dose of the
vaunted nostrum. (3) That in spite of his twenty-six
years in 1610 and the unexampled precocity which pro-
duced Nurptia Cuymic# in 1602-3, Andree was an inex-
perienced young man, on whom the fever of reform had

° 193

-- Page 223 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
fallen, and he imagined that it might be encompassed easily.
(4) That he proposed to work towards it by means of a secret
society. (5) That he travelled in search of like-minded
enthusiasts, though it is not added that he found them.
(6) That he decided on appealing to the follies and manias
of the period, or the passion for occult sciences, especially
the transmutation of metals and the elixir of life. (7) That
he would collect zealots and enthusiasts in this manner
and would select afterwards from among them those who
might be fitted for his purpose, this being the quest after
true philosophy and religion. (8) That to secure efficiency
in his appeal he invented an Order drawing secret knowledge
from the East and having already a respectable antiquity
of more than one hundred and twenty years. (9) That he
wrote Fama and Conress1o, which were sent abroad into
the world, but—for some obscure reason lying behind the
hypothesis—without the author’s knowledge. (10) That
they produced an uproar of hostility, which convinced
Andree that he must renounce, disavow and discredit
them, or imperil his ultimate schemes. (11) That being
gratified, however, by the universal delusion which he had
created, he cast more fuel on the flames by further publica-
tions—e.g., presumably Ture Cuemican Marriacs. (12)
That when he found the delusion growing and taking a
firmer root it is said that he was shocked, but apparently
all that he did was to satirize the Society in some of his
later writings, which are like the tea-pot of De Quincey,
unending, a parte ante et a parte post, or like a circle, without
beginning or end, for their origin is in the cloud and dark-
ness of Vira ap ipso conscripta, hinting at things quae
invito me perierunt, and their term is in things unknown,
which a branch of the Andrez descendants is said to pre-
serve in its archives to this day. I was planning a quest
of these once upon a time, but life is short and the art of
this kind of research is long and wasteful. I made an end

194

-- Page 224 --
Authorship of the Chemical Nuptials
therefore by ascertaining that none of the unknown treasures
were to the purpose of the Rosy Cross.

Such is the thesis of Buhle * in rough summary and I will
take it clause by clause. (1) Let it be granted in the first
place that evils of many kinds were rampant in Germany.
The Church Catholic and Latin had been succeeded by
a raging crowd of sects, mostly with knives in their boots
and clawing at each other’s throats ; moreover, the Roman
Empire was shaking on the threshold of the Thirty Years’
War, so that there was worse to follow, all schemes of further
reformation notwithstanding. (z) The schemes were many
and were in harmony at one point only, that all of them
came to nothing. (3) Perhaps also, whether the persons
concerned were young or old, there may have been a general
tendency to think that a reformation coup could be brought
to pass easily: Martin Luther stood alone by his chained
1 Dr. F. C. Held, the American translator and editor of Andrez’s
CurisTIANoPouis, is not only entirely convinced that the Fama was written
by Andrew, but is either unaware that the allocation has ever been challenged
or ignores it in his total assurance. He shews no knowledge of the literature
or of the debates arising therefrom. The publication of the Fama con-
currently in five languages is mentioned as if these versions were ready to
the hand of the student, whereas those alleged to exist in Latin, French and
Italian are utterly speculative, or have been cited in any case by persons who
have never seen them. That he should justify CurisTiaAnoPotis itself is
obvious and reasonable enough, but the alleged attempt to class it with the
Fama as to intent and scheme is a travesty on the serious criticism of a very
difficult subject. Crviras Soxts, the New Atzantis and CurisTiaNnoPoLis—
with all their differences—abide on a common ground, being all philosophical,
ideal commonwealths. Moreover, they share in common an atmosphere of
utter artificiality, apart from a single gleam of likelihood. The least pre-
posterous of all is possibly the imaginative excursion of Francis Bacon,
which had the good fortune to escape completion. The prototype of all
is the Uroria of Sir Thomas More. On the other hand, the Fama relates the
obscure beginnings of a supposititious secret society: it is neither of common-
wealths nor empires, has no direct eye on the seat of government and no
avowed concern with the body politic, except in so far as it might be amelior-
ated by the substitution of alleged Arabian occultism for the methods of art
and science in the Holy Roman Empire. I should add that the ill-starred
analogy is not instituted to sustain a claim of authorship, but as a literary
point of view which has occurred to the translator.
195

-- Page 225 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
Bible and alone he shook the Papacy. (4) There is the
fullest evidence in his writings that Andrez saw the evils,
with a great longing to reconstruct Society, German
philosophy and even German religion, or at least its scream-
ing sects: there is no evidence at all that he ever dreamed
of doing so by means of secret societies. His projected
Fraternitas Christi was neither to be a secret order like
later Masonry nor an occult order like the Rosy Cross.
(5) He did not travel in search of collaborators, for he was
at the University of Tiibingen till 1610, in which year—
as we know quite certainly—Adam Haselmeyer already
had a written copy of the Fama, he being then in the Tyrol.
On the contrary, Andree—as we have seen—travelled
in search of health. (6) For his alleged decision to utilise
the follies of the period there is of course no other founda-
tion than the dream of Biihle. (7) It did not occur to this
German Professor that the occult zanies and impostors
whom Andree despised and denounced were neither
likely to be sought by him nor to provide material for his
purpose, at least by his own hypothesis. (8) Those who
affirm, like Biithle, that Andree invented the legend of
Christian Rosy Cross affirm obviously that he was a liar
and a literary cheat. (9) They have never produced a single
point of fact to support their hypothesis, the alleged
similarity of literary style between the Fama and acknow-
ledged writings of Andree being precisely the kind of
rock upon which many better theses have split before and
since. It is the kind of likeness which is recognised by
those who want to find it. For a person such as myself
who does not, in the last resource, care two straws about the
authorship of the early Rosicrucian manifestoes, the only
similarity that I can see between Fama and CuyMIscHE
Hocuzzrr is that both are occult fables. Their distinction
is that the latter is rich in episode, diversified in pageant
and brilliant in colouring, while the former is tame and
196

-- Page 226 --
Authorship of the Chemical Nuptials
thin, the great allegorical opportunity offered by the open-
ing of the tomb being missed completely. As to the Con-
FESSIO, Which Bithle fathers also on Andrex, the anonymous
hand which emerges in that wretched performance is far
worse than the German hand of the Fama, and in its
Latin I can see no likeness to the Latin of Andree—for
what such a point is worth. (1c) When Biihle dwells on
the uproar of hostility caused by these pamphlets, he
stultifies himself and the facts. There was hostility of
course, but it was out of all proportion to their welcome,
in view of the royal news which they brought to all con-
cerned in their subject-matter. (11) They were received
with open arms and, as Bihle shews himself, that which
on his own hypothesis faced Andree was not the hostility
but the universal delusion which he had created. (12) The
suggestion that he was shocked thereby is assumed simply
to account colourably for the fact of Andrex’s severity
towards the Order when he wrote about it less or more
openly in later tracts. JI conclude, therefore, that so far
as the Gottingen professor is concerned and so far as those
are concerned who have followed him to the present day
there remains nothing in our hands to justify or even excuse
the alleged authorship of Fama and Conrsssio.

In presenting such a conclusion it is a satisfaction to
know that it exonerates the memory of Andree from a
charge which is not less disgraceful because it was preferred
by a friend rather than an enemy, and was, on the whole,
intended to glorify its subject, not to place a stigma upon
him. Whatever our opinions concerning the occult sciences,
whether we regard them as connoting a body of secret
knowledge or as fantastic and illusory arts, there is no
question that at the beginning of the seventeenth century
they were pursued with the uttermost zeal by untold
numbers who were in search of light and certitude on the
mysterious relations between God, man and the universe.

197

-- Page 227 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

There is little question that at such a period the occult
sciences were no manifestly impossible direction in which
to turn for aid. Their position was not unlike that of
modern spiritualism or psychical research of all grades at
this day: (1) in respect of their attractions, (z) of their
claims, and (3) of their distinguished exponents. Then as
now there was a mass of deception and self-deception ;
then as now there were innumerable impostors pretending
to dispense a knowledge which they did not possess—by
means of books and otherwise. Little tracts on alchemy
and magic were things of common colportage; needy
authors and commercial booksellers lived by and because
of them. But those on whom they lived were mainly
genuine inquirers, however easy of belief, seeking a guide
in the unknown darkness of chemistry and the yet more
cimmerian gloom of the unseen side of things. There
could be few conspiracies more villainous at that period
than an attempt to mislead defenceless students further.
If, therefore, Andree put forward the Fama and Con-
FESsIO, knowing them to be false in claim and fictitious
in story, the act was scandalous, and furthermore, in so
doing, he entered into distinct covenants for the communi-
cation of treasures of secret wisdom which he did not
himself possess, and he was therefore like “the rogues
and runagates” who are attacked in Rosicrucian mani-
festoes and in his Nurti# Cuymica#. He would have
known unfailingly that he was at work for the misery of
many. I have indicated in no uncertain manner the very
little use that I have for Johann Valentin Andree in any
of his moods or ways, but in his sincerity I believe at
least.

Before, however, dismissing Bithle and his thesis it is
desirable to add certain considerations which may tend to
exonerate him, at least in part. He was by no means the
first person who referred the early Rosicrucian documents

198

-- Page 228 --
Authorship of the Chemical Nuptials

to Andrez as their author. The argument from literary
style seems to have been put forward originally by Arnold
in the first years of the eighteenth century.!. He affirms
(1) that when Andrew was of “the ripe but ardent age
of twenty-eight years” a book called Fama FRATERNITATIS
was published in 1614; (2) that this was followed two years
later by Cuymiscue Hocuzerr; (3) that these are the
first works ? in which any notice is given concerning the
Order of the Rosicrucians; (4) that they differ totally
in character from anything produced by later writers,
such as Maier and Fludd; (5) that they correspond so
entirely with the acknowledged works of Andrez that,
from internal evidence, they have been ascribed unhesi-
tatingly to his pen. To these opinions and impressions
Arnold added an involved story which passed in his mind
for evidence and which I will endeavour to elucidate as
follows: (1) Among the contemporaries of Andrez was
M. Christoph Hirsch, otherwise Hirschen. He has been
identified with Joseph Stellatus, who published Pzcasus
FirmaMeEnti during the stormy debate of pamphlets which
followed the Rosicrucian manifestoes. (4) He was a pastor
at Roba and Eisleben, and he left certain writings which
were published posthumously. (3) In these, testifying at
third hand, he mentions having learned in confidence from
Johann Arndt how the latter had been told by Andrea—
also sub ros@—that he and thirty others, described as theos-
ophists, had sent forth Fama Fraterniratis, so “that under
this screen they might learn the judgment of Europe there-
upon, as also what lovers of true wisdom lay concealed there
and here, and would come forward in consequence.” This
testimony must be left to stand at its value, seeing that I

1 See the Hisrory of THE CuurcH anp or Heretics, already quoted.

2 [t follows that Arnold did not know of the Conressio and hence did not
know his subject.

3 He offers no means of dentifying his precursors in this criticism.

199

-- Page 229 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

have failed to trace in this country a copy of the posthumous
writings.1 It is obviously not evidence that would be
accepted in any court of law, and equally certain that a
tract with pretensions like the Fama could bring forward
only lovers of occult wisdom or its substitutes, while the
judgment of literati in Europe would be upon the validity
of the claims advanced and—whether confirmatory or other-
wise—little to the presumed purpose of Andrez and his
“ choir invisible.”

I do not pretend to do more than report briefly respecting
Johann Arndt and his vast array of volumes, with their
loaded pages. He was assuredly a theosophist of his
period and might well have been one of the thirty
whose combined wits were necessary to produce a
pamphlet of approximately as many pages. I imagine,
however, that he was nothing of the sort in fact;
but he wrote on Jacob Béhme, Valentine Weigel and
earlier mystics than either. It appears, moreover, that
M. Christoph Hirsch may himself have been a friend
of Andree and might therefore have learned at first
hand what he owed to a third party. ‘There was, finally,
another friend, to whom Andrew dedicated Book III of
Myruotocia CurisTiana in extremely laudatory terms, as
to clarissimo et consultissimo viro. ‘This was Christoph
Besoldt, otherwise Besoldus, who wrote at large and too
often for our patience in these days. He died in 1646, and
is said to have left some record about the plain character
of Fama and Conressro, a sufficiently oracular statement,
though believers in the Andree authorship have found it
plastic and have bent it accordingly to their purpose. But
so far as T am aware no reference to the alleged source
has been given by anyone. In the memorable year
1614 Besoldt was discoursing on Sicns or THE Times, but

} Or indeed anything in our public libraries under the name of M. C.
Hirschen.

200

-- Page 230 --
Authorship of the Chemical Nuptials
the portents of the Rosy Cross do not appear among
them.?

In the year 1619, and at Argentorati—that is to say,
Strasbourg—there appeared Turris Banet, being a judg-
ment concerning the Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross, or
otherwise the voice of Fame pronouncing against the Fama.”
The publication was anonymous, but it is certain, and there
is no question, that it was the work of J. V. Andree, after
whose familiar manner it comprises a series of dialogues,
twenty-five in all, each having three interlocutors, who
differ in every section. The seventh dialogue has reference
to Alchemy, while the tenth denounces Necromancers,
Kabalists, Chemists and other occult schools as plagues of
the Republic. Fame, in the last of all, addressing Obstinatus
and Resipiscens, exclaims: ‘‘ Men have been deceived
enough and indeed more than enough: it is time now to
set free those who are bound, to confirm the wavering and
make the sick whole. Woe is me, O Mortals, from this
Fraternity there is nothing left to look for. The comedy
is played. Fame erected, Fame demolishes ; Fame asserted,
Fame denies.” ‘This has been quoted in part by nearly
every critic, from Biihle downward: I give it for the first
time in full. It is beyond question that the voice and wit-
ness of Fame—a play upon the title of Fama—is the witness
and voice of Andrew. Otherwise, the allegorical persons of
the sections—Curiosus, Supinus, Solicitus, Scrupulosus,
Securus, Prudens, Astrologus, Calculator, Conjectans, several
bakers’ dozens—represent various opinions, as on the main
subject so also on subsidiary matters. A chief point of

1 Sicna TEMPORUM, Seu succincta et aperta, rerum post religions reforma-
tionem, ad hoc evi in Europa gestarum, Dijudicatio, Auctore CHRISTOPHORO
Brsoipo, Ic. Tubingz, 1614. It contains two tracts: (1) De Reforma-
tione Religionis, paceque religiosd in Germania constituta; (2) De Rebus post
pacem Religionis a Germania ordinibus constitutam, im orbe Christiano gestis.

2 It may be said that in the first section there is an address to the Brother-
hood on the part of Fama personified, but it is meant of course in mockery.

201

-- Page 231 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
interest centres in Calculator, who is actually Simon Studion,
as appears by the text itself. One of the interlocutors has
expressed admiration at the spectacle of heaven on
December 20, 1603, to which Studion replies by citing
Naomerria mea and its deductions from mystical numbers
concerning the restoration of Jerusalem and the fall of
Babylon. For his companion the position of the stars
certifies the solemn pledges and immunities of the Royal
Fraternity, while according to Studion the Holy and
Roseate Brethren are those whose advent was promised by
Abbot Joachim, St. Bridget, Lichtenberg, Paracelsus, Postel
and other Illuminati. As I do not suppose that Andrez
would have foisted on the author of Naometria opinions
which he was unlikely to have held, I regard as significant
the statement thus put into the mouth of Studion. He
appears only once in the recitals, and there is no means of
identifying the other characters with living personalities
of the period. The dialogues are dull and tiresome: they
offer, moreover, very little to our purpose on either side of
the debate. In the nineteenth section we hear about For-
tunate Isles and places more safeguarded, like Fessa and
Damcar; but the reference serves nothing. Resipiscens
in the final colloquy, speaking after Fama, says that he
dismisses the Fraternity, meaning as denounced by her,
but that it is impossible for him to let down those who
grow Roses under the Cross and keep themselves unspotted
from the impurities, confusions, delirium and vanities of
the world—namely: vera Christiana Fraternitas. He
aspires to be joined therewith. The allusion is to a Brother-
hood of Christ which Andree proposed to form and which
is here invested with the insignia of the Rosy Cross. It
may have been a subtle device in his own view, but it may
be questioned whether it recommended the new scheme
to any side of the debate. For the rest, I conceive that
the various colloquies might confirm in their scepticism

202

-- Page 232 --
Authorship of the Chemical Nuptials
those who were disposed to unbelief ; but that one among
hundreds who were drawn by the talismanic magic of
Rosicrucian claims should have been directed into other
courses by the declamations of Turris BaBEt is a proposition
which I reject utterly.

In conclusion, as to this text there are certain misstate-
ments concerning it which have passed from hand to hand.
(1) Reghellini mentions one, according to which it intimates
that Andree had demitted from the Rosy Cross, that he
might join the Brotherhood of Christ. The French his-
torian of Masonry thinks that the reference is vague, but
no such intimation is found in Turris Baper. (2) The
English translators of Mosheim state, on the other hand,
that it implies or admits that Andree “‘ was himself con-
cerned’ in spreading the reports concerning the Rosy
Cross. It does nothing of the sort. (3) It has been said
also to mention M. C. Hirsch, to whose story of the thirty
theosophists I have referred already. It would be un-
necessary, however, to point out that the name does not
occur in Turris Bapet, had it not also been added that
the mythical story itself is found therein.

A considerable tract, entitled Turez Booxs or CHRISTIAN
Myruotoey, is also referable to the year 1619, and though
anonymous so far as the title-page is concerned, the dedica-
tion is signed by Andrez on October 18 of the previous
year. It must be admitted that he who reads it from cover
to cover is like a barefooted pilgrim treading a stony road ;
but in any other subject [ should count it a strange thing
that most of those who have cited it have gone so far astray.
There is Nicholas Bonneville in 1784, who descries the Rosy
Cross in all our Masonic symbols and claims to have dis-
covered the characteristics of a Masonic Tracing-Board in
Curistian Mytuotocy. Where he does not say, and I con-
fess that his meaning eludes me, having searched in vain for
these needle-points of supposed symbolism in the mytho-

203

-- Page 233 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

logical bundle of hay. There is also the Honourable
Auberon A. Herbert, who is responsible for stating that the
German Illuminati of St. Christopher Rosy Cross were a
society founded by one faithful brother out of the ruins
of the Knights Templar. The authority is Myruotocia
CurisTIANA, pp. 305, 306, and Herbert adds an explanatory
suggestion that the Frater fidelissimus was one Sir Richard
de Heredom, otherwise Brotocanus or Carbonatus, the last
being an anagram of the second name. In his casual and
trusting way Mr. Wigston quotes this statement without
reference of any kind, it being only too evident that he has
not gone back to the source. Andrez says nothing of the
kind at the place cited, or anywhere else in the volume.
The section in question is entitled Ordo Crucis, and it speaks
of the Church having created Christian chivalries—as, for
example, the Templars, though none of them are men-
tioned by name. At the end, instead of an allusion to St.
Christopher Rosy Cross, Andree speculates why “ our
elders ”’—majores nostri—attributed the stature of a giant
to a certain martyr in the days of Decius who assumed that
name which signifies Christum ferens, Christ-bearing, ex-
oterically as if he were like unto the Cross of Calvary, but
inwardly because he bore the Christ Mystical in his heart.
It calls to be said that Herbert had no purpose to serve by
wresting the remarks of Andrez, so it follows either that
he mistranslated incredibly or that he reproduced an an-
terior blunder which I have not been able to trace. These
are the kinds of quest that one follows in Rosicrucian
research, and this is the profit attached to them. I question
whether the many makers of reverie who have quoted
Andrez in the particular connection can have read a single
sentence from beginning to end—not to speak of the
context,

The Turee Booxs or Curistian Mytuotocy contain the
now famous paragraph beginning Planissime nibil, which

204

-- Page 234 --
Authorship of the Chemical Nupuals

has been quoted everywhere as the final judgment of
German good sense on the claims of the Rosy Cross, when
the debate concerning it was beginning to manifest a certain
sense of weariness. It has been favoured especially by those
who regard Andrew as author in chief of the manifestoes,
whether as a jeux d’esprit, experiment on the mind of the
age or planned imposture of a satirist ; but it has proved
no less serviceable to those who regard the subject from one
of these points of view apart from any definite thesis as to
authorship. The observations are placed in the mouth of
Alethea, the personified Spirit of Truth as conceived at the
period by a spokesman of Wiirtemberg theology under the
zgis of the Confession of Augsbourg. ‘‘ Most indubitably
I—Alethea—hold nothing in common with this Brother-
hood. When it came about, no long time since, that some
on the literary stage were arranging a play-scene of certain
ingenious parties, I stood aside as one who looks on, having
regard to the fashion of the age, which seizes with avidity
on new-fangled notions. As spectator, it was not without
a certain quality of zest that I beheld the Battle of the
Books and marked also subsequently an entire change of
actors. But seeing that at this present the theatre is filled
with altercations, with a great clash of opinion, that the
fight is carried on by vague hints and malicious con-
jectures, I have withdrawn myself utterly, that I may
not be involved unwisely in so dubious and slippery a
concern.”

The oration stands at its value, which is mil on the
question of authorship, though presumably the Andree
hypothesis would postulate that he, speaking in the person
of Truth, certifies that he has washed his hands of the whole

1 The meaning of this statement can be only that those who moved first
in the foundation of the Rosy Cross—as e.g. Studion—found others inter-
vening—namely, makers of later pamphlets, who will come before us in the
next chapter,

205

-- Page 235 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
business. It is of course an impossible construction, the
testimony being that Alethea has never had a hand in the
business and now leaves the auditorium. In the address to
the reader at the beginning of the third book there is a
much more significant passage, which—so far as I am aware
—has not been cited at all. The author appeals to God on
the audacity of slander against him. He has been repre-
sented as a chemist, though he had no furnace ; as a caster
without brass ; a brother, when he has no society ; and as
a prophet, though he is destitute of oracles. It will be seen
that popular report has connected him with the Rosy Cross
and has doubtless imperilled his position as an orthodox
theologian and minister of reformed religion, and he inter-
venes to rebut the charge or appeal against it. If there is
a halting accent in the process, as it will be seen, I think,
that there is, we must remember that there was a skeleton
in his cupboard, and the inscription thereupon was NurTi&
CuyYMIc&®, written at sixteen and published at thirty years
old.1

There is nothing further in Myruotocia CurisTIANA
which need, I think, detain us. The tract was followed by
a century of “ satirical dialogues ” under the general title
of Menippus. It is supposed to be anti-Rosicrucian, but I
do not find that the Order is mentioned by name, though
it seems evidently the subject of reference in Titulus XII,
which is called Brorueruoop. A later section is headed
AvtTHorum Cartatocl, and alchemists are mentioned therein,
but the allusions come to nothing. The last Title is Instr
tuTio Macica, and this is the longest of all; but again it
is little to our purpose, except as indicating the unqualified
disdain of Andrew for everything—root and branch—
which belongs to occult sciences. This is the prevailing

‘lt This notwithstanding, the vital issue is simple: Andree denies
categorically that he belongs to any Society, and he is lying if his testimony
is false. He is guilty of suggestio falsi if he belonged to it once and left.

206

-- Page 236 --
Authorship of the Chemical Nuptials
characteristic of all his undoubted writings at this period,
and it does not in my opinion connote a revulsion of feeling
or a change of view. It is certain that he did not issue
Fama FRaTERNITATIS, as One who wove a gracious and talis-
manic fiction about a circle of secret practices in which
he believed and which it was his hope to elevate above
the realm of mania and imposture. ‘That is an impossible
hypothesis. The alternative advanced by Biihle is merely
ridiculous because it postulates Andree as imbued with an
earnest zeal for reform and seeking to promote it by circu-
lating fraudulent fictions for the advancement of beliefs
which he hated, as if these would draw about him the right
thinking, right acting and mentally qualified circle essential
to his scheme in hand. According to one of his early
biographers, he desired earnestly to infuse “ a new life into
the religious feelings of his age.”” What manner of new life
would he draw from those whom he deemed to be either
quacks or zealots, the knaves and fools of false science and
false philosophy? But we have seen that, according to
others, he, being a young man, a wit and satirist of his day,
foisted a cruel hoax upon the German occult mind for the
poor purpose of fooling it. This is a possible proposition,
but I have shewn why it must be rejected. We may or may
not admire Andrez as a theologian and religious author of
his period, but at the very least he was a man of blameless
life, while as he understood and realised them he strove for
the betterment of his land and period: it is intolerable to
fasten a gross slander upon him in the absence of adequate
as indeed of any evidence.

I conclude therefore that whether or not the House of
the Holy Spirit—as the Fama testifies concerning it—was
built on sands, or was comparable to a house of cards, it was
not built by Andrez.1 I have given, as it seems to me, the

1 Myruotocia Curistrana, Book III, even if it stood alone, is an
adequate justification of this view.

207

-- Page 237 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

only possible explanation of his possible connection with it.
In his early life he was acquainted with Tobias Hess, whom
he admired, respected and commemorated in glowing terms;
he was almost certainly acquainted with Crusius, who did
not die till Andree was twenty-one, and may even have
had a hand in his education ; and it is by no means unlikely
that he was acquainted with Studion himself. If the Rosi-
crucian claim and legend were hatched under the wings of
the Militia, he would be familiar with the fact at least, and
perhaps intimately. But as there is nothing to shew that
he belonged to the Militta—though Tobias Hess presum-
ably did—so there is no evidence that he was connected by
membership with any Rosicrucian Brotherhood, either be-
fore or after the publication of the Fama. If there is any
one point which emerges with irrecusable clearness from the
vast literary output of J. V. Andrez, it is that he had no
concern with the occult sciences, except as a hostile satirist
It is true that he wrote Nurti# Cuymica, but that was a
boyish romance, and he was not for such reason an
“ occultist,” any more than was William Godwin because
he was the author of St. Leon. When Vira as 1Pso con-
SCRIPTA was penned in the old age of the Wirtemberg
theologian, the ludibrium description expressed his way
of regarding it after the lapse of a lifetime: in reality it

1 In this connection I should perhaps mention and dismiss the gratuitous
hypothesis (1) that Andrea was not the founder but the spokesman of the
Rosy Cross ; (2) that he was appointed to issue the manifestoes ; (3) that he
restored the Order, this having existed previously. The first view is
advanced by Sédir, the second by the authors of Tue Rosicrucians, while
as regards the third it is to be met with in several quarters. No one has
ventured to offer any evidence for these speculations. Compare Dr.
Westcott, in the Transactions of the Soc. Ros., on the subject of Nuprie
Cuymicz, He testifies to “grave reasons for believing that the kernel
of the work, the original scheme and the mystical basis was derived from
C..R.. and his personal pupils in their Temple House of the Sanctus
Spiritus one hundred and sixty years before the time of Andrez,” who
may have published or edited it. The commentary on this farrago is Vira
AB IPSO CONSCRIPTA,

208

-- Page 238 --
Authorship of the Chemical Nuptials

was fantasia magna, and it does great credit to his years, as
yet untouched by the depressing spirit of homily, not over-
weighted as yet by the mill-stone clauses of the Confession
of Augsbourg. Moreover, he wrote in his own tongue and
was not engaged, as subsequently, in the smartness of ever-
lasting somersaults turned in the turgid Latin of the cum-
brous German schools. As I intimated over thirty years since
and have reaffirmed now, I believe that he dressed up his
juvenile extravaganza with a few Rosicrucian tags and tie-
ups, to express his detestation of the Fama, its claims and
all its ways, by making confusion worse confounded in
respect of the debate, then raging at its highest. It is
probable that he knew enough and too much of the zealotry
and false enthusiasm which lay behind it. The fact of
such detestation appears everywhere, in the important
Vira, in the texts already cited, in CurisTIANopotis and
in a comparatively obscure effort like De Currosrratis
Pernicig Syntacma. The Fama is always delusion and
the Brotherhood always folly.

On the other hand, Fama Frarernitatis is a purely
occult document, based on an alleged secret knowledge
brought from the Near East. Thesole point at which the
manifesto can suffer comparison with the aim of Andrez is
over the question of reform. But that which Fama desired
was a better understanding of certain Magnalia Nature,
especially the transmutation of metals and elixir vite.
There is little to shew that it had any job in purely official
religion, any more than in politics, being content with the
German Reformation as regards the one, and on the other
with the Roman Empire. Andrez, on the other hand, is
reported by all his apologists and shewn in all his writings
to have been out for religious reform, grounded on the
Confession of Augsbourg and directed against Calvinists
and Anabaptists. There is no analogy between these things,
except in the shibboleth of reform, while the answer to both

P 209

-- Page 239 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
on the plane of events was one—namely, the Thirty Years’
War.

That which the Fama offered was an open entrance to a
House of Great Mysteries, an aureum seculum in prospect,
a medicine of men and metals, and yet these things were
only res minores in the treasury, while it was indicated that
they would be made available to those only whose hearts
were fixed on some other and majores res which were kept
in the hiddenness of the House. In this manner the docu-
ment has the air of dealing in a veiled theosophy: I mean
to say that a theosophy of the period seems to be at the
back of its claims. We shall see how Fludd transmuted it
in the limpid light of his own qualified mysticism, reposing
under the wings of the Christian Church in England, as
then by law established.

This is how the case stands in respect of all that arises out
of the authorship of Nupri# Cuymicz.1 It takes us back
to the fact of Naomerria as the first intimation in sym-
bolism concerning the Rose and Cross. Here is the direction
to which we are justified in looking for the origin of Fama
FRaTeRNITATIS, elther as we now have it or in its root-form.
The text and its legend are to be judged by German occult
thought of the period, by the influence of Paracelsus, by
the apocalyptic astrology which followed in the wake of
Reformation, by the expectation of the Second Advent.

1 I set aside utterly an allegation reported by Miss Stoddart in her Lire
oF Paracetsus, namely, that on his death-bed J. V. Andree made confession
about certain “ fictitious pamphlets ”” which were intended as satirical fables,
but they had gone forth into the German world and Rosicrucian Societies
had been founded at Niiremberg, Hamburg, Dantzic and Erfurt. The
“infection ” spread also to Holland and Italy—more especially Mantua and
Venice. Miss Stoddart gives no authority, formulates her statement in a
curiously confused manner and proceeds to describe the official clothing of
Rosictucians ; but it happens to be that of the eighteenth century. Ina
word, she does not know the first elements of her subject. Pahl, who was one
of Andrex’s early biographers, would have been acquainted with death-bed
confessions—if any—but he sought to free his subject from the taint of

210

-- Page 240 --
Authorship of the Chemical Nuptials
Simon Studion and his Militia stood for these enthusiasms,
which are reflected in the Rosicrucian manifestoes, and [
should expect to find that these were descendants, lawfully
begotten, of Naometria, were it possible to examine
more fully that all-important text. Emanating from such a
source in zealotry we need no longer regard them as pro-
ducts of conscious fraud, while we are also saved from
accepting the alternative of modern occultism, that they
were the work of veiled Masters. Their extravagant fixed
beliefs were centred about a mythical or allegorical figure.
The Fama is, in fact, an early vestige of a design which
developed subsequently under the zgis of the Rosy Cross—
namely, the spiritualisation of alchemy, of which Jacob
Bohme offers an independent and contemporary example.
The treasures of gold which were offered to the Roman
Emperor in the generosity of the Conressio were in reality
a wealth of doctrine, while its reformation of all the arts
was an apocalyptic light on Scripture. I trace also a certain
clouded reflection of old Lullian philosophia. It is pre-
cisely one of those cases in which a common accident of
fortuitous analogy may be taken for something which had
a purpose behind it, and I am by no means intending to
suggest that the inventor of a so-called Universal Science
or the traditional maker of the materia aurea of Rose
Nobles by way of transmutation is the historical personality
Rosicrucian connections, either as founder or member of that mysterious
body. He explains also how the supposed relation arose, namely, that Andrez
conceived various projects for infusing new life into the religious feelings
of his age by means of societies and when the Rosicrucians sprang up,
claiming a similar programme, the projects were identified, the known
personalities in the one case being held to stand behind the anonymz in the
other. I set aside also an allusion in a letter written by Andrez to Comenius,
date 1629, concerning his Fraternitas Christi ; saying that it was planned
“about eight years ago,” post fame vane ludibrium. It is quoted by Bege-
mann and I know of it only through the good offices of Mr. F. N. Pryce.
No special pleading can suggest that it throws light on the authorship of
the Rosicrucian texts.

2ul

-- Page 241 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
which is clothed in the vesture of legend by Fama Frater-
nitatis ; but Raymund Lully looks like a kind of prototype
in the actual and outer world, as the following tabulation
shews :—

(7) C..R..C.. acquired an Ars magna, as against the
invention of one by the theosophist of Majorca. (2) It
included the Secret Medicine of Metals and the Great
Elixir. (3) But these, according to his legend, were pos-
sessed by Lully. (4) The Universal Science was a great
scheme of reform to displace the systems and conventions
of established authorities in seats of learning—Aristotle,
Averroes and scholastic philosophy at large. (5) But
C..R..C.. returned from Arabia Felix and the City of
Dreams at Damcar on a quixotic mission expressible in the
same terms, though the seats of intellectual thought in the
German Fatherland had not exactly the same occupants
when the Fama passed into writing. (6) The reform of
C..R..C.. was a laughing-stock to the learned of Europe,
and Lully—notwithstanding life-long efforts—could gain
scant hearing from Church Councils or the Papal seat of
authority at Rome and Avignon. (7) The refuge of both
was to reduce their systems to writing. (8) In this manner
there emerged the Lullists in the one case and the Rosy
Cross in the other. (9) Lully was tinctured with Kabalism
and so also was the German Order, while the dream of both
was to realise the unity of science. (10) In fine, at the
period of Studion, the doctor illuminatus, Raymund Lully,
was still remembered in Europe, his Universal Science was
still extant and still had its apostolate. He has been classed
among heretics, but he died a martyr at Bugia, preaching
to the followers of Mahound, and the process of his beatifi-
cation was begun. His proposed reformation was anti-
scholastic but not anti-papal, and C..R..C.. was a re-
former, by the hypothesis of his legend, mainly in the matter
of arts and sciences. Lully became a centre of romantic

212

-- Page 242 --
Authorship of the Chemical Nuptials
myth—il magico prodigioso—a son of Hermes, with his life
prolonged through centuries, at once a saint and an adept.
Whosoever wrote the Fama may have had his story in mind.

We have seen that according to Repzrrorium the
Militia became “ a strong sect ”—that is to say, of Second
Adventists, hot gospellers, readers of celestial signs and cal-
culators of mystic numbers. ‘They would have represented
as such a consensus of mania which must have been abomin-
able in the sight of Andrez, for it has to be remembered
that he was a man of clear and sane mind, holding to a
reasonable mean in the matter of reformed religion, to that,
in a word, which—as we have seen—is called Bible Chris-
tianity. Ceteris paribus, he is most comparable among
modern types to Dr. Clifford, whose salient contrast was
the Rev. M. Baxter, of Tue Curistian Heranp and the
number of the beast. Studion was the contrast of Andre
—on the one hand, theosophy in the tatters of Barnaby
Rudge, and that, on the other, which is represented by
Txeotocia Grrmanica. There was no sect at the period
so likely to have produced the Rosicrucian claim as Militia
Cructfera Evangelica, and no person so likely to have written
the Rosicrucian manifestoes as Simon Studion or his imme-
diate successor, if any, in the “ strong sect.” I make this
statement, remembering that Studion, according to one of
my correspondents who speaks with official knowledge, is of
serious importance for the history of antiquarian work in
Wiirtemberg, and that his “ epigraphical writings” have
been carefully ‘‘ worked through.” It is obvious that his
qualifications as an antiquary are without prejudice to his
extravagance as an enthusiast in sectarian religion. For the
rest, and because it is important not to cloud the issues, we
shall do well to remember that the manifestoes of the Rosy
Cross are not to be judged out of hand and sentenced on
the evidence of one of their aspects. When Eliphas Lévi
had occasion to put on record that Khunrath was a zealous

213

-- Page 243 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
adherent of the reformed religion, he added—as we have
seen—that in this he was “a German of his period, rather
than a mystic citizen of the Eternal Kingdom.” The Rosi-
crucians were Germans of their period. But Khunrath was
also a catholic and hierarchic mystic, dealing with spiritual
mysteries under the veil of alchemy. The Rosicrucians, in
like manner, had other doctrines than those of Protestant-
ism and other aims than “ the ungodly and accursed gold-
making.” However vaguely, the fact emerges in the Fama,
amidst the pretence of its occult claim; it comes into
full view not long subsequently to the publication of
that document ; and in fine, but after generations and cen-
turies, it shines radiantly in lumen vultus Christi. I conclude
that Andrez, as one standing without, knew all the occult
claim ab origine symboli, and that he loathed it—also ab
origine.t I conclude also that after its own manner the Order
was in earnest as was he himself: that it desired earnestly
“ the supreme medicine of the world,” those other magnalia
of which the Conrrssio speaks, the “amendment of
philosophy ” along the lines of its own zealotry, and a
better government to come. ‘There came a time, after
many changes, when it began to understand these things
in another and higher way.

1 Compare the article on Andree in Auicemstne Deurscue BiocRaPHIE, :
I, 441-6. It happens that I have consulted it only after this chapter was
completed and am therefore the more gratified to find that it is in general
agreement with my own conclusions, namely, that Andrew was most
probably acquainted with the entire “ mystification ” but was not the author
in chief. The article suggests further that he may have tried to turn it
towards his own serious purposes, but this seems dubious, especially as it is
admitted that he could not fail to recognise the inevitable fact that Rosi-
crucian fables would unmask themselves.

214

-- Page 244 --
CHAPTER IX
DEVELOPMENT OF ROSICRUCIAN LITERATURE
Ir is a matter of common knowledge in almost any hand-
book of historical reference, that the publication of Fama
FratERrNITAtTis created a very considerable stir in Germany.
It was hailed with enthusiasm in what must be called the
occult circles—not that there is real evidence of ordered
fellowship or manifest combination of experimental
research anywhere—and the emotions of the moment
found vent in pamphlets, corresponding to its own form
of appearance—rough and ugly enough—while a cloud of
eager aspirants took, as they could take only, the course
suggested by the manifesto and formulated their desire
for admission into the ranks of the Brotherhood by means
of printed letters. The Conressio, of course, stimulated
production of all kinds—I mean, judgment and appeal—
though the second document proved no more helpful than
the first in disclosing the whereabouts of the Order or
identifying the persons of its members. As we have seen,
there was a suggestion also of let and hindrance, to increase
the difficulties and underscore the disappointments of
many. For this and for other reasons, amidst the chorus of
approval, there arose presently a hostile element in the
debate. Not all the alchemists of that period, not all the
Lutheran theosophists were prepared to accept blindly an
unsupported account of itself which the Brotherhood had
been pleased to put forward as the warrant for a proposed
amendment of that crooked and misguided time, nor was
215

-- Page 245 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

the necessity of reform to be admitted without demur by
all and sundry, or the kind of remedies proposed to be
passed without challenge, especially in view of their
vagueness. But it was the frustrated aspirants for admission
who had printed their forms of profession, their letters of
humble supplication, who had magnified the unknown
Society and found all its claims true: it was these who
began ultimately to find themselves on a solid ground of
complaint, when they came to compare notes in the booths
and the market-places, the academies and colleges, for it
appeared that all applications had been made in vain.
There was not one of them who was nearer the desired
goal than if the Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross had never
issued invitations, and they had never responded, accepting
all the claims—with a tongue in the cheek or otherwise.
As it was an open question whether anyone had been
admitted at all, so it began to look doubtful whether such
a Society existed. ‘There was too much of uncritical
reliance on the fact of the written word and far too much
dullness in the mind of German occultism to encourage
that side of the question ; but it was to be met with here
and there. Nor did it occur to any that their canon of
judgment was worthless, because it was possible—on the
hypothesis at least—that there were receptions of certain
candidates; but those who were drawn within the circle
and its sanctuary passed into a place of silence, while the
clamours increased without on the part of those who were
rejected.

I do not doubt that Buhle is right in affirming that some
of those in the school courtyards and taverns began to
compare notes in a very adverse sense, to say that they had
been fleeced and flouted, which notwithstanding, to all
intents and purposes, it is clear that they were Rosicrucians
themselves, makers of gold in prospect, holding the keys
of knowledge or at least beginning to know. In this

216

-- Page 246 --
Development of Rosicrucian Literature
manner a few may have sought to incorporate themselves
fluidically, much as Alsatia and Whitefriars worked more
or less in gangs, for the good of the secret commonwealth
of rogues and runagates. Beside that which was sincere—
if anything—within its own measures, there arose up
therefore sporadic impostures, mostly mushroom growths,
and they are heard of from time to time. A little later on
we shall meet with a supposed case in point at the Hague,
but at present we are concerned only with early memorials.
Their development and the debate connoted thereby—a
thing sui generis in literature—may be considered under
four aspects, it being understood that I am dealing in the
present chapter with publications up to and including the
year 1620. (1) By far the most considerable numerically
are pamphlets, for the most part in the form of letters,
being those to which I have referred, and embodying
applications for admission within the ranks of the Order,
not only—as I have stated—accepting all its claims, but
often couched in extravagant terms of laudation. (2) The
issue of independent tracts on Alchemy, Magic and other
branches of occult science or philosophy, but prefaced by
a fervent dedication addressed to the Brotherhood. They
may be regarded generically as theses written with a view to
admission by persons who wished to exhibit their quali-
fications and ardour more elaborately than was possible
within the few pages of an epistle. (3) Tracts of a critical
character, in examination of Rosicrucian principles,
whether the conclusions reached were favourable or hostile.
In a few cases it is difficult to determine whether they
were written by friends or enemies. (4) Further missives
which have the appearance of being issued officially, but
dubious for the better part and in some cases almost
obviously fraudulent.?

1 They would be the work of those “new actors” mentioned in the
Address which introduces Book III of Mytuorocia CurisTiana.
217

-- Page 247 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

We may take these classes successively in the order thus
tabulated, and as regards applications for admission they
connoted in all cases professions of faith not only in the
Order itself, its affirmations and titles of sanctity, but in
its peculiar religious, philosophical and pseudo-scientific
principles. In a word, the postulants were anxious to
establish that they were protestants of their period, who
loathed the Man of Sin; that they denounced Aristotle ;
and that they were true disciples of Hermes. They signed
their productions occasionally with names which may be
taken as real, more often with symbolical titles and even
with initials only. Some of them supplied addresses,
obviously to encourage communication, but many letters
were anonymous and left the identity of their writers to the
wisdom of the Brotherhood. On the external side, the most
noticeable fact concerning them is the early date at which
they began to appear, lending colour to the story that the
Fama was circulating in manuscript prior to its appearance
in print—as we know by the notary Haselmeyer—or
alternatively that the Cassel edition of 1614 was not the
first published. An Episrora ap RevereNDAM FRaTER-
NITATEM R..C.. came to light at Frankfurt in 1613, and
is identified with a German SrenpscuretBen of January
12, 1614. The author in the latter case is veiled by the
initials I. B. P. and offers his assurance that he had read the
Fama on June 28 of the previous year. He had seen also
an answer sent by the Order to an application of a personal
friend. Other printed applications appeared (1) at Lintz
in Austria, under the initials M. V. S. and A. Q. L. I. E.,
also on January 12, 1614; (2) under the initials M. H. and
I. I. on August 14, 1614, from which it follows that the
Fama had come also into their hands; (3) under those
of G. A. D. in November of that year. By the hypo-
thesis of Buhle these three publications were prior to
the Cassel Fama, being the first edition of that text

218

-- Page 248 --
Development of Rosicrucian Literature
which had come within his knowledge. The month of
December, 1614, is for some reason the approximate
time of publication most favoured by bibliographers, in
which case it must have appeared concurrently with
Logpia Tavaperos by Paulus de Didis, but my knowledge of
this tract is confined to bibliographical lists.2. According to
the title, it was concerned with that wisdom which leads
to the attainment and fruition of a good and happy life,
in conformity with the mode and spirit of the favoured
Order of Brothers R «.C....*

As communications addressed to the Order did actually
precede the appearance of its first printed manifesto, it
will be easy to understand how they multiplied after the
Fama was published and became available throughout the
German world. The litere quorundam Fraternitati R-.C «.
se dare volentium would form an exceedingly large collection,
could all of them be drawn together. We hear of the
Latin Conressto appearing at Frankfurt in 1615, bound up
with a sheaf of applications, so described in the title.
They came out separately also in all forms and sizes,
duodecimo, octavo, quarto, folio, while the fashions in
which they addressed the Brotherhood are similarly varied.
Among writings belonging to the year 1615, a correspondent,
anonymous like themselves, issued a Diacrapu at Augsbourg

1 There would be priority also in the case of Andreas Hoberwechsel,
who speaks of the Fraternitas Crucis Rosacee in a letter dated from
Prague on September 1, 1614. See M. Sédir: Husrorre pes Rosz-
Croix, p. 82.

2 It appeared in 1614 without particulars of place or publisher.

8 As there are very few examples in England of the petitions put forward
by candidates, I may mention for those who are curious on this unprofitable
subject a folio volume labelled Liber H, being No. 1459 of the Ashmolean
MSS. It contains in the writing of Ashmole: QuiNnQUEGENARII CUJUSDAM
VIRI, Gui per 20 annos arcana investigarat, Epistoua ad Fratres Rose@ Crucis, in
corum Fraternitatem se recipi petens. It occupies folios 280-2 of the
volume and a note says that the petitioner anagrammatice se nominat in calce
—Tellus Astri Solis.

219

-- Page 249 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
and dedicates it simply Fratribus Rosee Crucis Another
who offers no indication of place, explains that he is a
friend who is devoted especially to the glorious Fraternity
and most Illustrious Order.?- In the opinion of L. G. R.,
it is not only illustrious but reverend, and his considerations
are submitted to their Worships in metrical form, as one
who would give a test of merit. Under date of January 12,
an apostle of the absolute wisdom proffers a simple response
to the highly illuminated Order.’ It is called honourable
by another, as if one who reserves his speech, but for him
the mysterious sodality dwells in some thrice-guarded
island of the blessed. On September 4, M. B. chooses a
laconic style and sends forth a Responsion at Amsterdam
which does not waste words in the matter of lJaudation.®
For C. V. H., it is a Christian and High Fraternity.? But
the superlatives tend to predominate, so that the simple
prayer of a Frankfurt layman, who is however a friend of
wisdom, has rather a cold air and contrasts with him—H. R.
—who on September 17 wishes eternal salvation in God
to the Sons of True Wisdom, or with the splendid intent of
an unknown who has neither local habitation nor name,
but in answering the Illustrious Brotherhood proposes to

i Diacrapue Fratribus Rosee Crucis, Augsburg, Schultess, 1615. It
appeared in quarto.

2 SENDSCHREIBEN an die Glorwiirdige Briiderschaft des Hocherleuchte
Ordens vom R..C:., etc. Dated from Camposala on Jan. 29, 1615.

3 Episroua ad Illustrem ac Reverendissimam Fraternitatem R..C.". metro
legata, ad eosdem missa a LL. G. R. Frankfurt, 1615.

4 SENDSCHREIBEN oder Einfeltige Antwort an die Hocherleuchte Briider-
schafi dess Hochl. Ordens dess R..C.., etc. Frankfurt, 1615. Compare in
respect of terminology a letter signed J. D. Z. L. and addressed to the high,
laudable Brotherhood of the enlightened, inspired, noble and dear Men of
the Rosy Cross. A confidential and benevolent Epistle. The date is Aug. 10,
1615, and the motto is taken from Psaum xxxvii. 10.

5 Missive an die Hochw. Fraternitet des R..C.".. 1615, sine loco.

8 Antwort oder Senpsrizr an die Briderschaft vom R..C.'., etc., 1615.

? EInFattice wnd Kurze Antwort iiber die ausgegangen Fama und
Confession der Christl. Hocherl. Briderschaft des libl. Ordens vom R -.C
(C.V. HL). 1615, 5.2.

220

-- Page 250 --
Development of Rosicructan Literature
rebuild the Palladium, or ruined Athenian edifice. The
palm, however, is perhaps due to one who supplements his
missive by a concise philosophical discourse and addresses
it to the Godwise Order, which is said to be regarded
unanimously as dedicated to Natural and Divine Wisdom,
whereunto the anonymous writer is also zealously attached?
“The secret of the Lord is with them that fear Him,”
according to Psaum xxv. 14, and this is the text of the
thesis, as it is also the message of its argument. The
mottoes behind the title are In silentio et spe erit fortitudo
vestra and Nil prophanum in philosophia. It is a broadsheet
of eight pages, dated July 10, the first part being in German
and the second in Latin. The few Rosicrucian references
make the usual exclamatory display and, of course, convey
nothing. What remains is designed to indicate the Hermetic
qualifications of the Candidate. The occult name Lili is
ascribed to the First Matter and is well known to students of
the literature as one of the veils of the work. Regeneration
and renovation are said to be the beginning, middle and
end of fixion, which is certainly true of the alchemical
experiment on its mystical side. Another significant
allusion is: Omnia ab uno et omnia ad unum, and this is
a doctrine of experience on the deep spiritual side. It
seems otherwise familiar, but I do not remember the
source. ‘The philosophical process is: R. Quinti esse
Macro et Microcosmi sine (sic, read sive) Mercurit Philoso-
phict, Ignis Invisibilis celestis vivi Salis metallorum ana
qs. Fiat arte magi-philosophica rotando, solvendo, coagu-
lando et fixando. ‘This is seemingly Medicina Summa, and
a true process, at least on the spiritual side of Hermetic

1 Reparation des Athenischen verfallenen Gebeuws Paladis samt vorberge-
henden proemium und folgenden angehdngten Appendice, etc. 1615, 5.L.
2 SENDSCHREIBEN mit Kirtzerm philos. Discurs an die Gottweise Fraternitet
des léblichen Ordens des R..C.*.. 1615, 5.0.
3 See Pernety’s Dictionnaire Mytuo-Hermétique, 1787.
221

-- Page 251 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
Philosophy. Understood thus mystically, it is a key to the
following lines :

The Matter, Vase, Furnace, Fire and coction—these are one thing
only :

The one thing and the sole one, the beginning, middle and end.

It suffers no foreign substance and is performed without any alien
thing.

Behold, in Mercury there is that which the Wise seek.

As it is clear that applications for admission can be
matters of curiosity at most, and whatever they may tell us
of their writers can throw no light upon the Order to
whose consideration they appeal, we can dismiss in a few
words the epistles which were printed during the five
years subsequent to 1615. “The majority continued to be
the production of concealed writers and many of them are
known only by their descriptions in catalogues. It is
interesting to note an example in Italian, addressed to the
Most Laudable and Most Virtuous Order, on March 7,
1616, by an unnamed person writing from an unnamed
place.t On the other hand, Valentin Tschirness has left us
the benefit of his identity in full, as a philosopher and
licentiate of medicine at Gérlitz, when he published, as
if at full-finger speed, his Raprp Messacr to the Philo-
sophical Fraternity at the place in question, adding his
publisher’s name, that there might be no doubt on the
matter.?, So also we have cause for contentment with J.
Trenzus for his frankness respecting himself on December 3
of the previous year, when he issued an epistle as a disciple
of Divine Wisdom at Frankfurt and described the Lords

1 Breve et Simprice Risposra alla dignissima Fraternita del virtuosissimo
Ordine di R.C.". Stampata addi 7 di Marzo, 1616.

® Scunecte Borscuarrr an die Philosophische Frat. vom R..C.. durch
Valent. Tschirnessum, etc. Gérlitz, 1616. Published by J. Rhambaw.
The writer says that the denomination Rosicrucian is a popular error, taken
from the name ascribed to the founder. Why it was conferred upon him is
kept secret. Compate Maier.

222

-- Page 252 --
Development of Rosicrucian Literature
and Brothers as venerable, most instructed and highly
enlightened men.1 Intermediate between both are certain
students of three liberal and most respectable Arts—not
more specifically described—who addressed the August
Fraternity from Rostoch on June 11.2. There were many
other missives to the glorious sodality in the same year, and
among those of 1617 I note an anonymous answer—to the
Fama specifically—in Dutch,® a reply dated from Leipzig
on November 16,4 and a benevolent message from two
courageous anonymi issued at Oppenheim on March 20.5
There was also a Sendschreiben addressed to the Fraternity
at the centre of Germany, but I have no particulars con-
cerning it.6 In 1618 it is only necessary to mention an
Address to the Decemvirate of the Brotherhood on the part
of a secret key to the Castle which can scarcely be opened—
but this I suppose to be fooling ;? two missives to the
Glorious Fraternity which appeared at Frankfurt ;*® and a

1 Ad Venerandos, Doctissimos et Illuminatissimos Viros, Dom. Fraires 8
Rosee@ Crucis Epistoua J. Eipyvatov, Diving Sophie alumnt. Francofurti, 1616

2 Episrota trium liberalium et honestissimarum artium studiosorum ad
Augustam Fraternitatem R..C.'... Rostochii, 1616.

3 Ontdeckinghe van een onghenoemde ANTWoRDE of der Famam Frato, sine
loco, 1617. The author, according to Kloss, was Andreas Hoberveschels von
Hobernwald,

4 Ernrattics ANTWoRTSCHREIBEN an die Hocherl. Frat. des lobl. R..C.’..
Datum Leipzig, den 16 Nov., 1617.

5 WoHLGEMEYNTES AUSSCHREIBEN, an die Hochw. Frat. des R.'.C.". zweyer
ungenannten biederleuth. Published at Oppenheim by H. Palthenius, 1617.

8 SENDSCHREIBEN an die R.*.C.*. in Centro Germania, 1617. The things
which I have been unable to consult are no doubt in analogy with those made
available in my research. The particular “‘ Missive ” under notice would be
as much and aslittle to our purpose as BrEvERESPONSUM ad amicam invitationem
celeberrime Fraternitatis Rose@ Crucis utcunque concinnatum, published in
1617, the text being dated October 23 of the previous year, It isa pamphlet
of eight unnumbered pages and is a medley of prose and verse in praise of
Paracelsus: after such strange manner does an anonymous aspirant reply
briefly to a friendly invitation.

? Senpsrier an die Herren des Decemvirats der Frat. der R..C.. voin
geheimen Schlissel des fast unerdffentlichen Schlosses. 1618, sine loco.

8 Zwet SENDSCHREIBEN, etc, They appeared in a single pamphlet.

223

-- Page 253 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
Responsum! with an unintelligible epigraph concerning
a lion which trusts in the cross and a light sufficing for those
who advance in faith. I note under date of June 14, 1619,
a letter to the Holy Fraternity,® introducing an appended
parable and the explanation thereof. It is the last which
needs to be cited, for by this time the controversial aspects
of the subject had put an end to the letters of simple
believers. Those who desired the Society went to work
in another way, it being tolerably evident that a Rosicrucian
Order was about somewhere in Germany, whether or not it
was identical with that which first published the Fama.®

There is no cause to particularise at length on works
dedicated to the Brethren of the Rosy Cross, having
explained already the motive which actuated the procedure
in most cases. I have shewn in my first chapter that the
occasional practice was likely to dig pitfalls for unwary
modern writers, the case in point being Dr. Dee’s edition
of the Vanity or Macic. Probably the first dedication
in point of time was inscribed by Johann Faulhaber, “‘ with
humility and sincerity,” to the “most enlightened and
famous Brothers R. C.” It was prefixed on September
1615, to his ArirHmMeticaL Mystery.* Faulhaber was
a professor of mathematics at Ulm and a writer on this
subject; but he had also alchemical interests and was

1 Responsum ad Fratres Rosace@ Crucis Illustres. 1618, sine loco. The
writers were Hercules Ovallodius, Hermannus Condesyanus and Martinus a
Casa Cegdessa Marsiliensis, who pleaded for admission because of the evil
times. They regarded the Brethren as instruments of Divine vengeance in
the consummation of the age.

2 Demitices SENDSCHREIBEN an die Hoch. Gottselige und Heilige Frat. der
Rv.Ce., ele—sine loco, as usual.

3 IT have been unable to trace particulars of Kloss, No. 2509, in which the
Fraternity was supposed to answer certain communications received. It
appeared in 1617.

* Mystsrium ArirHMeEticum, sive Cabalistica et Philosophica Inventio,
nova admiranda et ardua, qua numeri ratione et methodo computantur .. .
tluminatissimis laudatissimisque Fratribus R..C.. Fame viris bumiliter
et sincere dicata, Vimens. Calendis Sept., 1615.

224

-- Page 255 --
Development of Rosicrucian Literature
doubtless drawn by these to the claims and pretensions
of the Rosy Cross. Much about the same time Jacob
Schelling published his work on the nature of the eyes,
entitled Opruatmia, which he submitted for judgment
and criticism to the Honourable Order. This dedication
is dated April 9, 1615, and the folio appeared some time
in the same year. A late dedication to the Brethren of
the Rosy Cross was that of Thomas Vaughan’s ANTHRO-
POSOPHIA THEOMAGICA in 1650, and—as we shall see in
its place—the motive was identical with that which I have
ascribed to those who first made the experiment.?

My third section will call for consideration in detail
as it stands for the great debate which proceeded without
intermission during the five years ending with 1620,
though we shall find later that it had not finished altogether
at that date. It is exceedingly various in character and
is dificult to present synthetically, as it lends itself to
numerous distinctions. I shall set aside from the present
consideration all tracts which, in virtue of any pretence,
may be regarded as official publications, including those
—if any—which claim, falsely or truly, to be written by
individual members of the Order. They belong to my

1 Jacob Schelling: Optuatmta, sive Disquisitio Hermetico-Galenica de
Natura Oculorum. In Latin and German. Erfurt, 1615. There was also
M. Potiers’ Novus Tractatus Cuymicus, de vera materia, veroque processu
Lapidis Philosophict. It was dedicated devoutly to the Brotherhood and
included a true and sincere judgment on the claims of the Order. The
place of publication was Frankfurt, anno 1617. There was finally Raprus
Purtosopuicus, 1619, a book of revelations addressed to the Brethren in
humility.

2 It was in reality the last, because Casata, SpecuLum Artis Er NATURE
tn AtcHemia, 1654, is a Latin translation of Casata, oder Spiegel der Kunst
und Natur in Alchemie, which appeared at Augsbourg in 1615. The
preface is signed Stephanus Michelspacherus Tirolensis, who terms himself
an ardent worshipper of wisdom. The tract is designed to shew that the
Stone of the Wise is three and yet one, The dedication on the title-page
reads in the Latin version: A strenuo Sapientie cultore, et una cum prestan-
tissimt cujusdam Philosophi Diagraphe bujus ipsius argumenti, Rosee Crucis
Fraternitati dicata edita, quo hac in materia amplius nil desideretur.

Q 225

-- Page 256 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
fourth section. It will be understood that in 1614, during
the first flush of enthusiasm, there was only the voice of
praise. It was raised by the anonymous Apocrisis, called
otherwise a lawful response to the greatly renowned
Fama, and is of course an affirmation of its claims, apart
from criticism or question.1 For the rest, it is not to be
confused with applications for admission to the Order
or pamphlets in the class of petition, as, e.g. those, other-
wise negligible, which entreated the wise Brotherhood to
issue its promised catalogue of false and sophistic works
onalchemy. Speaking generally of tracts written in defence
of the Order, there are those which stand at their value
as individual testimonies but are without consequence,
since they evoked no response or counter-criticism from
anyone. ‘There are a few very curious pamphlets which
have the air of apologies but are in reality hostile works.
There are, finally, those which are answers to direct attacks,
and there are the attacks out of which they arose, altogether
a notable group.

As regards the first on my list, there was nothing likely
to be said about certain JupcmMENTs concerning the Status
and Religion of the Brotherhood which were formulated
at Frankfurt in 1616 by several anonymous but “ well
known and most learned men,’ who are described as
separated from each other by their distant places of abode.?

1 Apocrisis, sew Responsio Lecitima ad Famam Laudatissimam Fratrum
ac Societatis R..C.. Frankfurt, 1614. It was reprinted or reissued at the
same place in 1615, cum Conressione ET Livreris quorundum, Fraternitati
se dare volentium.

2 Juvrcra Clarissimorum aliquot ac Doctissimorum virorum, locorum
tatervallis dissitorum, gravissima de Statu et Religione Fraternitatis Cele-
bratissime de Rosea Cruce, partim soluta, partim ligata oratione conscripta.
Francofurti, 1616. We may compare another but quite worthless perform-
ance of the same year which is also of multiple authorship, the persons
concerned with the production of its eight unnumbered pages terming
themselves Sadrach, Misach, Abednego, Pegasus, Aristeeus and Serpen-
tarius. They are Lutherans who regard the Pope as Antichrist, and their

226

-- Page 257 --
Development of Rosicrucian Literature
The judgments are affirmed to be important, even to
a high degree, but the tract is filled with perfervid adula-
tion of the “ holy and enlightened ” Brotherhood. It is in
reality a bid for initiation and might well have been placed
previously with others of its own kind, except that it
claims to pronounce as well as to apply. There is also
another reason: its medley of verse and prose is like
a herald going before and preparing the way for Robert
Fludd at his best on the Rosy Cross, when he spiritualised
the whole Order and its claims—as we shall see in the
next chapter. The aspirants before us are in search of
no material gold, whether that of Nature in the mines
or of Art in the alembics of adepts ; and this is their title
to consideration, assuming implicitly that the all-wise
Order stands guard over the true philosophical and spiritual
treasure, a single particle of which is efficacious to trans-
mute the soul. Ina word, it is gold of knowledge, by which
the pure mind—set free from earthly concerns—ascends
to the Courts of Heaven.

Passing over some items which I can speak of by report
only,} there are two tracts which have been the subject
of a previous note, in connection with Nurtia Cuymica,
otherwise Exucrparius Cuymicvus and Exrucrparius Major.
The first is concerned more especially with unfolding
Rosicrucian intentions on the subject of world-wide
discourse is concerning the star followed by the Magi at the nativity of Christ
and the new star “seen by many for years in the German firmament,”
presumably that in Serpentarius. The pamphlet is entitled: 4d Fratres
illustres nec non doctrina sapientes podoaraipov Episroa.

1 As examples of these I will mention: (1) Jupicium THroLocicum
pronounced on the Fama and Conrsssto of the Laudable Brotherhood of
R..C.". and determining—apparently in the affirmative—whether a Chris-
tian can be affiliated to the Order with a good conscience, or without
offending against the Majesty of God. It was completed on Jan. 27, 1616,
by David Mader, a theologian of Osterfeld and pastor at Nolra. (2) Fivete
Anti Finetis Specutum, by Rudolph de Bry, 1620, sine loco. This “ faithful
mirror of a faithful soul” is an example of official publications—real or

227

-- Page 258 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
reform and recalls therefore the Universal REFORMATION
translated from Boccalini; but, as indicated by the sub-title,
there are many references in the second to the significance
and importance of THe Cuemicat Marriace. The author
was Radticho Brotoffer, i.e. Christoffer Rotbart. It is the
larger and more important of his two tracts, but is in
reality a sequel to Exuciparius Cuymicus, comparatively
a small pamphlet of the same year and both embodying
an explanation of the projected reform as an allegorical
veil of the secrets symbolised alternatively under the name
of the Philosophical Stone. I characterised these tracts
long ago as curious and perverse, which remains their
proper description. It should be added that although
their interpretations are couched in terms of certitude,
they do not suggest that Brotoffer wrote as an initiate,
testifying from within the Order.?

The next work which calls for consideration, entitled
Conressio Recepra, was composed in the month of
March, 1617, and appeared in the course of that year,
supposed—which have not passed through my hands. It is described in the
sub-title as a collection of letters sent abroad by the hands of a certain
Fraternity, belonging to no bastard and adulterous generation but to the
true and legitimate R..C.’., residing secretly over the whole earth. The
description is useful for comparison with the testimony of Julianus de
Campis, affirming on the basis of his own initiation that the world itself con-
tained only four members of the Order, and also as another indication on the
activities of impostors masquerading in its name.

1 The titles in full are: (1) Exucmarius Cuymicus, oder, Erleuchterung
und deutliche Erklerung, was die Fama Fratrernitatis vom R..C.. fir
Chymische Secreta de Lapide Philosophorum, in ihrer Reformation der Welt,
mit verbliimten Worten versteckt haben. Von Ratichs Brotoffer, 8vo, pp. 85.
Published at Gosslar in 1616. A second edition appeared in the following
year. (2) Exucrparrus Mayor, oder Erleuchtungen iiber die Reformation
der ganizen Welt. F.".R..C.., aus threr Chymischen Hochzeit und sonst mit
vielen andern Testimonits Philosophorum. 8vo, pp. 234. Published at
Liineburg in 1617. After what manner the two tracts were supposed by:
Semler to combine the legend of Christian Rosencreutz with that of Caspar
Rosencreutz, of whom no one has heard otherwise, it ig impossible ta
conjecture. .

228

-- Page 259 --
Development of Rosicrucian Literature
without imprint, under the initial A. O. M. T. W. It
was written—as the title indicates—to approve the Con-
Frssio FraTernitatis, which it describes as the Order’s
act of faith, and the consideration is certified as useful
for those who have regard to their temporal and eternal
salvation. ‘The Society is not only good and profitable
but righteous in the eyes of the Almighty and charged
with many great secrets. The Lord Almighty reveals
Himself in many ways, and those who follow the Divine
counsels can enter into paths leading to true knowledge,
with the consequent possession of transcendental secrets.
The quest involves, however, considerable study and even
indefatigable research, as well as personal sacrifice of other
kinds. The Brethren of the Rosy Cross are exhorted to
press on with their sublime work. The pamphlet is one
of many which in addition to destitution on matters of
fact respecting the Order were characterised by extreme
poverty of thought and complete lack of suggestion.
In what manner the reader’s salvation was at stake does
not emerge in the pamphlet.

In 1618 it cannot be said that simple applicants, accusers
or defenders had learned anything by the experience of
debate, but the arena was clearing slowly. Some interest
attaches to Prcasus FirmMaMENTI,! because it is held to

1 Pecasus FirmaMeENTI, sive Inrropuctio Brevis in veram Sapientiam
que olim ab Aigyptiis et Persis Magia, hodie vero a Venerabili Frat.
R..C.. Pansophia recte vocatur, in pie ac studiose inventutis gratiam
conscripta a JosrpHo Sretraro Secretioris Philosophie Alumno 1618.
We may compare with Stellatus a GerstricHer Discurs unp
Betracutunc, by a doctor who styled himself Gratianus Amandus
de Stellis, which is in the best manner of Rosicrucian  sacra-
mental names. ‘The tract appeared at Oppenheim, also in 1618, with a
Rosicrucian reference on the title-page and the following symbol: a Rose
encircled by a Crown of Thorns, a St. Andrew’s Cross superposed on the
flower and a large C at the extremity of each arm, being the initials of a
sentence which serves as an inscription, namely, Crux Christi Corona
Christianorum. ‘The Spiritual Discourse and Consideration is on the proper
manner of creating that piety and love which are presupposed on the part of

229

-- Page 260 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
have been written by Christopher Hirsch, the pastor of
Eissleben, at the request of John Arndt, whose acquaintance
we have made previously in connection with Andrez.
The name which appears on the title of this pamphlet is
however, Josephus Stellatus, described otherwise as “a
pupil of the Secret Philosophy.” It was published by
the favour of Apollo and with the special privilege of the
Muses, though the content cannot be said to justify
such exalted patronage. It refers to the ‘“ Glorious
Society” as people dedicated to God wholly and only,
while as regards their status they “ flourish triumphantly
in the fell labyrinth of this world,” even as the rose amidst
thorns. ‘The Sibylline Oracles are taxed for their homage,
and the writer seems to regard them as in some sense the
successors of Christ. The tract, speaking generally,
possesses all characteristics of its class, or all marks by which
we are able to distinguish the typical German advocates
of the Rosicrucian Order: (1) Strenuous impeachment of
what is called the ethnic, i.e., the Aristotelian philosophy ;
(z) enthusiastic devotion to the principles of the Reforma-
tion and laudation of Martin Luther, who is termed un-
conditionally ““a man of God”; (3) similar praise of
Paracelsus, whose allusions to Elias the Artist had caused
him to be regarded as the special prophet and preceptor of
the Rosy Cross, for the promised adventus Artiste was
identified with the coming of the Order. According to
Stellatus, there are two chief interpreters of Nature,
Hermes Trismegistus and Theophrastus of Hohenheim,
after whom—but obviously at a distance—comes the
Benedictine monk, Basil Valentine. Beyond this common
ground of all the apologists, Stellatus exhibits a great
those who would share in the communion, science, wisdom and fraternal
fellowship of the Brethren R.'.C.*., who are said to despise the whole
universe and yet to be held in esteem and friendship by God. The counsel is
not to love only in words but in deed and truth. There are references to
John Arndt, Valentine Weigel and to a so-called Evancexrum of Tauler.
230

-- Page 261 --
Development of Rosicrucian Literature
respect for his contemporary, the alchemist Michael Maier,
and he refers also frequently to THe Curmican Nupriats,
about the great impression created by which there can be
no question, for it had the outward aspects of a romance
embodying an ordered meaning. The main inspiration,
however, is that of Maier, described as ‘‘ the most famous
poet and doctor of medicine,” who furnishes proof in-
fallible from monuments of antiquity that Colleges of a
Rosicrucian kind have been always in the world, although
not visible to all. Whether Maier succeeded in establishing
a valid analogy will be seen in the chapter devoted to this
famous Son of Hermes. Stellatus seems further to infer
from the testimony of Bernard Trevisan that the celebrated
Turzsa PuinosopHorum originated from some such source
as a secret society and was therefore edited rather than
written by its reputed author Aristeus.:| There is a refer-
ence also to a congress of “ certain brethren,” held from
time to time at such towns as Frankfurt. That there were
conventions of this kind is perhaps inevitable rather than
a matter of possibility, just as there was a Militia Crucifera
Evangelica and a conference which formulated the Con-
fession of Augsbourg; but as a contribution to Rosi-
crucian antiquities they are cited to little purpose.?

1 The Tura was a great authority for Trevisan, but he says nothing of
the sort. The reference of Stellatus is probably to a passage in THE
Natural Purtosopuy or Merats, which represents Aristzus or Arisleus (1) as
Governor of the universal world for sixteen years, owing to his great know-
ledge and understanding ; (2) as convening the disciples of Pythagoras who—
“as we read in the Chronicles of Solomon”? (szc)—was the most wise of men
after Hermes. ‘The Tursa is “ the code of all truth ” and truth above all
falsehood. Hereof is the witness of Trevisan. The Rosicrucian apologist
accepts the Dramatis Persone of the old debate, explicitly and implicitly, as
those whose names they bear and as assembled in actual session, however
divided in time, in which case, since they were adepts of a secret science,
they would constitute a secret society. But I have stated elsewhere that
the Tura bears all the marks of a manufactured thesis, not of a report.

2 There is nothing in the tract of Stellatus which lends any colour to
a supposition that he was himself an initiate of the Order or one of its

231

-- Page 262 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
“To you it is given to know the Mysteries of the King-
dom of Heaven” are words of Christ which the Ecuo
applies to the Order. ‘There were darker things in the
mind of yet another anonymous who penned a Jupicium on
the Seal and Trumpet, and on the Mystery of the Reforma-
tion to come, according to the Fellowship of the Rosy
Cross.1. The Trumpet is that of the last Jubilee, and
the Seal appears to connect with those ominous words of
the Apocatypse: “ One woe is past; and, behold, there
come two woes more hereafter.” There is much on the
Key of David, the Corner Stone and the coming of the
Holy Kingdom. We hear also in strange symbolism con-
cerning the Fount of Life, and although there are no
Rosicrucian references anywhere in the text itself, we
are assured at the end of all that whosoever has doubted
early substitutes, nor indeed that he was acquainted with anyone who
occupied such a position. What is more, the same statement, without need
of modification, applies to the anonymous and pseudonymous partisans
practically all round, the few excepted—well under six—who, at least by
their own hypothesis, wrote officially as members. The others discuss
divisions of philosophy, the several pillars of sclence—de omni re scibili—but
leave their readers no wiser than before on the true issues of the whole
investigation.
1F..R..C.. Fama & Scanzia Repux. Buccina Fubilet ultimi. Eoe
Hyperbolee prenuncia montium Europe cacumina suo clangore feriens, inter
colla et convalles Araba resonans. 1618, sine loco. The last sentence reads in
English : “ Hyperbolic prediction of Eos, smiting with resplendent noise the
summits of the mountains of Europe, sounding amidst the hills and valleys of
Arabia.” The English, however, is one thing and the meaning—if any—
another. As regards the settlement of all doubts concerning the Order, the
affirmation is expressed in the two following lines:
Quisquis de Rosez debitas Crucis Ordine Fratrum,
Hoc lege, perlecto carmine certus eris.
To quote them reminds me of another pamphlet, containing some twenty
pages of German verse, said to have been written originally in Latin by a
Brother of the Society and printed by I. S. N., described as Publicus et Poeta
Coronatus—perhaps a laureate of the Order. The preface is dated Sep-
tember 16, 1617, and the pamphlet was published at Neustadt in the
following year. The title is Ara Faverts Terapurct, followed by the
letters F.".X.".R.*., meaning Frater Crucis Rosee.
232

-- Page 263 --
Development of Rosicrucian Literature
concerning the Order will be assured after reading, which
notwithstanding I am unable to determine whether it is
a defence of the Order or a judgment which relegates
it among the seven last plagues. It is not unlikely that the
Unknown Superiors of the Mystery were in a similar posi-
tion at the time. If anything on the Rosicrucian subject
fell still-born from the press, amidst all the curiosity and
fever, it was surely Fama £ Scanzia Repux.

The Repinrecratio of 1619 places on its title-page an
epigraph from Holy Scripture which is in strong contrast
to that of the preceding tract: Ommnes de Saba veniunt,
aurum et. thus deferentes, et laudem Domini annunciantes.
There are obviously all things good to follow from the
coming of the Order. There is not only such an institu-
tion but it is in possession of great secrets—Magnalia
Det et Nature. 'The activities of the Brotherhood may
be shared by all and any with a good conscience and with
due regard to the sanctions of their Christian faith. The
reproaches which are cast at the Order are therefore of
no effect, as for example (1) that its members are enemies
of lawful governments; (2) that they are Calvinists or
Jesuits ; (3) that the whole business is farcical, having some
undisclosed purpose in view. There is a bid for initiation
in certain prefatory verses dedicated to the pia turba
sophorum, in which the author describes himself as a friend,
hoping to be regarded propitiously and admitted within
the ranks.?

1 Bevo frovpe avias, id est RepinTEGRATIO an die Frat. vom R..C.. dass
man sich mit gutem Gewissen derselben mag theilhaftig machen. 1619, sine
loco, It does not appear in what sense the Order was renewed by affirming
that it could be joined with a clear conscience. This tract may be compared
with Tazosopu1 EximiEpistora . . . de Sapientissima Fraternitate R..C...
Frankfurt, 1619, the text itself being dated September 3, 1617, and signed
with the initials C. R. E. The person addressed is Anastasius Philaretus
Cosmopolita and the letter replies to a question raised by him in regard to
the Brotherhood. It is a defence of the Order on the ground that its
religion is that of the Word of God and the Catechism of Luther. There is

233

-- Page 264 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

The last tract offers a path of transition to the next
stage of our research, for it indicates that the religion
of the Order had become a rock of offence. I have men-
tioned already an implied suspicion that the original mani-
festoes protested too loudly and that Adam Haselmeyer—
perhaps with a bee in his bonnet—scented the Jesuits at
work behind the pamphlets. This—as we know—was in
1610 or thereabouts, and there could be nothing more
fanciful on the surface. In 1616 Daniel Cramer, a Pro-
testant theologian who taught at Wittenberg and Stettin,
produced a tract entitled Societas Jesu er RosExcRucIs
vERA,! which connected the two institutions, and the fact
was not likely to be lost at that period, though it was not
a polemical treatise but a collection of forty emblems
and letterpress on the name of Christ Jesus. About the
same time and at Frankfurt, Christianus Philadelphus,
described as a lover of pansophia, the catholic wisdom, pro-
duced a meditation on the symbol, cipher or sign of the
father original of the Rosy Cross, leading up to an inquiry
concerning the religion of the Brotherhood.? It is obvious,
the seal of Martin Luther notwithstanding, that the Rose
centred on a Cross is not suggestive of the Protestant
Reformation in any of its forms or ways. Moreover, the
a vague suggestion that the writer was speaking with first-hand knowledge of
the subject. There is also WonLGEMEYNTES ANTWORT-SCHREIBEN an die Frat.
von R..C.'., the text of which is dated July 8, 1618, but it did not appear
till 1619, when it was published at Frankfurt. It is a pamphlet of eight
pages, signed §. V. S. P., and deals generally with Fama and Conressio,
giving reasons why all pious persons should be ranked on the side of the
Order. The title claimed by the writer is that of Philotheosophus.

1 The sub-title reads: Hoc est, quatuor decades Emblematum Sacrorum de
Nomine et Cruce Fesu Christi. D’Alembert’s Encyciopépis, ou Dictionnaire
Raisonnée des Sciences, des Arts et des Métiers, T. XIV, 1765, mentions a
counter-charge on the part of Christophorus Nigrinus, namely, that the
Rosicrucian Brethren were disciples of Calvin.

2 Eurocistia ¢ Symbolo Patris Primarii Rosee Crucis, qui dicitur, cujusnam
sint Religionis, Scripta a Chri: Philadelpho, Pansophi@ Amatore. Franco-
furti, 1616.

234

-- Page 265 --
Development of Rosicrucian Literature
vaunted new philosophy was admitted to contain “ much
of theology ”! and implied a general reformation respecting
Divine Things as well as those that are human.? It was
to be expected therefore that many would ask, with
Libavius in 1615: ‘‘ What manner of new theology is
this ...? Again, where is its novelty, if it be that of
the primitive Church? Isit of Gentile, Jew, Mahommedan,
Papist, Aryan, Anabaptist, Lutheran, or follower of Para-
celsus?” The most definite charge—though still in a
manner of questioning—was formulated in 1619 by a tract
entitled Rosa Jxsurtica,? otherwise Companions of the
Jesuit Band. The proposal put for consideration was
whether the two Orders, being the chivalry of the army
of Jesus and that of the Rosicrucians, were not in reality
one and the same body, as if the one had been driven into
concealment, to emerge later on as the other. The author-
ship has been referred to J. Themistius de Melampage.
I conceive that the pretensions of the publication may
be judged out of hand by the writer’s alleged protecting
office and that the place of original publication was perhaps
part of the camouflage.

There should be no need to say that about the last
charge which can be brought in the likelihood of things
against Rosicrucians of the early seventeenth century is
one of being papal in disguise. ‘To prefer it seems com-
parable to the counter-folly of a certain Jesuit, Abbé
Gaultier, who is cited by Charles Mackay as devoting
a book to prove that the Fraternity was Lutheran. On

1 Conressio Frarerniratis R.*.C."., cap. II.

2 Fama Fraternitatis R..C."., following the description of the Tomb.

3 Rosa Jesurrica, oder Fesurtische Rotigesellen ... von J. P. Dia S.,
Fesuitarum Protectorem (sic). It claims to have been done at Brussels on the
day of St. John, 1619, which of the two saints bearing this name not appear-
ing. ‘There was a reprint at Prague in 1620.

4 Memoirs of Extraordinary Popular Delusions, s.v. Rosicrucians, edition
of 1852, Vol. I, p. 171.

235

-- Page 266 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

the surface, it is sufficiently proved by the Fama and
Conressto, and these therefore, still at their surface-value,
dispose of the papal charge. The matter of fact behind
the whole business is that in a great and ever-expanding
cloud of speculation no one knew anything certainly and
that almost any view was tenable. Amidst a multitude
of applicants some—as we have seen—may have been
received within the secret circle, but they did not emerge
to testify. It was therefore an open question whether any
appeals had been answered ; but if they were, there was
no knowing whether the replies came from a genuine
source. It is very clear that impostors were thought and
known to be about.?_ It is to be observed further that there
was a strong element of hostility manifested at a fairly
early period, the chief case in point being that of Libavius,
whom I have quoted already. He was no anonymous,
unknown or obscure person, but perhaps the most prolific
writer of his period on Hermetic Medicine and Alchemy.
He was, moreover, of notable attainments in experimental
research, the first person to speak of the transfusion of
blood from one animal to another, while a preparation
called “ the liquor of Libavius ” was long used in Jabora-
tories. Andreas Libau was born at Halle circa 1560 and
died in 1618. He has been represented by Lenglet du
Fresnoy as a follower of Paracelsus, but was really opposed
to the school and recommended it on one occasion to
slumber in its own absurdity. The point does not signify,

for his firm belief in alchemy might have drawn him well
enough in that direction. Among his Hermetic writings

may be mentioned Dirrensto ALCHEMI@ 'TRANSMUTATORIA,

1 See Dr. Georg Molther’s Retatio DE QUODAM PEREGRINO, qui anno

superiori Wetzlariam transiens, se Fratrem R..C..: confessus est et mira fecit.

Francofurti, 1616, It had been preceded in 1615 by “a true history of

what passed at Wetzlar with a Brother of the Order of the R. C.,” i.e.

Wanruarticr Hisrortg, so stch zu Wetzlar mit einem Bruder des Ordens der

R. C. zugetragen. Frankfurt, 1615. This was the original German version.

236

-- Page 267 --
Development of Rosicrucian Literature
Opus Atcuimim Practicum, Apocatypsis HERrMETICA
and Aucuemia TriumpHans. They may be termed the
records of a worker who had long laboratory experience,
which is more than can be said of Michael Maier, though
he is a much greater contemporary name in German
alchemy. As the warfare of Libavius was less against the
doctrine and practice, the claims and philosophia sagax of
the sage of Hohenheim himself than it was against the
neo-Paracelsica of his own day, so was his hostility to the
Rosy Cross more especially an opposition to its methods
rather than its pretensions otherwise. He had written so
much and so long upon Alchemy and Hermetic Medicine
that he could feel little tolerance for these anonymous
upstarts who affirmed in their superciliousness that the
art of transmuting metals stood last in the inventory of
their secret treasures. He knew in his heart and no doubt
reflected bitterly that after long years of labour he had
failed to produce transmutation, though he could prove
its possibility as he understood the nature of things.
Who were they that had done far differently and better,
according to their boasting hypothesis, and by what
warrant did they denounce “‘the ungodly and accursed
gold-making ” or affirm that many books “‘ under the name
of Chymia were set forth im contumeliam gloria Dei”? It
must be said that Libavius is captious enough in some
of his criticisms, gratuitous in his own assumptions, and
that—worst of all—he misses the obvious points and the
strongest points badly. It is idle to belittle the alleged
journey of Christian Rosy Cross in search of Eastern
magicians because there were magicians and to spare at
home. It is impertinent to affirm that a society ordained
by God should be able to prove its mission, for in 1615
there was no such point at issue. It is feeble and sorry
commonplace to condemn the secrecy of the Order on the
ground that those are lovers of darkness whose deeds are

237

-- Page 268 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

evil. But these are the kind of considerations which fill
two folio tracts devoted to the Order alone. The sup-
posed makers of a new theology are recommended to make
also a new god, but above all to beware of going headlong
into the old perdition; and those who would unveil
the Mystertarcha Dei are warned that the “searchers of
majesty shall be overwhelmed with glory.” 1 It is obvious
that the Rosicrucian House of the Holy Spirit—even if
more properly it was a House of Dreams—was not likely
to collapse when trumpets like these sounded before
its gates and walls. The truth is that Libavius was
strong in hostile purpose but he had no offensive
materials, or only instruments of debate. I have given
already his analysis of the Conressio FRATERNITATIS in
quite another connection; but having produced the
“thirty-seven reasons”? of Rosicrucian ‘ purpose and
intention,” his objections to all and several do not bear
citation.

Now, it happens that the star which ruled the fortunes
of Rosicrucian hostile criticism must have been provided
with a sense of humour which the criticism itself lacked,
and it was able to promote in its subjects a marked dis-
position towards change of mind. It began early with
Libavius and continued till late in the story. I do not
suggest that he had read over his folios and in cooler
moments had found them weak or inconclusive; I do not
suggest that they were written prior to Nuptiz Cuymic#
and that because he was an alchemist the glittering pageant
of the Marriace brought him to another frame of mind ;
I am scarcely prepared to affirm that he would have
recognised a new spirit intervening in his Rosicrucian reverie,
yet it came about that in a final treatise Libavius changed

1 The Rosicrucian vision of a possible Paradise on earth connoted the
Anabaptist heresy, according to Libavius, and he seems generally to have
regarded the Order as an Antichristian movement.

238

-- Page 269 --
Development of Rosicrucian Literature
his ground! He wrote forty-three chapters, de omnibus
rebus Rosicrucianis, the Stone of Philosophers, the Magical
Language, the Spheric Art, the Universal Reformation as
a prelude to the Day of Judgment, the restitution of all
arts, the wisdom of Adam, Enoch and Solomon, the
Earthly Paradise to come. He was prompted, as he tells
us, by the desire and command of certain worthy persons
and confessed to a spirit of friendly criticism, by the
inspiration of which he proceeded to affirm (1) that the
Rosicrucian Order was no mere figment of debate, but a
Society which existed in fact; (2) that all persons would
be well advised to join it; (3) that there was much to be
learned thereby and considerable wisdom to be attained ;
(4) that it was graced by sound doctrine in things belonging
to religion; (5) that it was to be praised for denouncing
the Pope; (6) that it had laudable views on Mahomet; and
(7) that the value which it set upon the Bible redounded
to its great credit. The one thing needful, however, was
that seeing the corruption of the world and its incapacity
for improvement prior to the Judgment Day, the Order
should relinquish forthwith any programme of universal
reformation, the same being left to God, and should set
its heart upon one of a private kind, restricted presumably
within its own ranks and working in the hearts of its
accepted postulants.?

1 The Rosicrucian writings of Libavius are (1) Dz Puizosopuia Har-
Monico-Macica Fratrum Rose Crucis, incorporated with Examen
Puitosopuim® Nova, que Veteri abrogande opponitur, 1615 ; (2) ANALYSIS
Conressionis FRATERNITATIS DE RosrEa Cruce, 1615; (3) D. O. M. A.
Wolmeinendes Bendenken von der Fama und Conression der Bruderschafft
dess Rosencreutzes, 1616. These have been noticed in the text. He wrote
also ApMonirTio pe Recutis Nove Rota, seu Harmonica Sphere Fratrum
de Societate Rosee Crucis, incorporated with Appenpix Necessaria Syntag-
matis Arcanorum Chymicorum Anprex Lipavu. Francofurti, 1616.

2 Tt must not be supposed that the Weti-mzanine Opyections did in
no sense correspond to their title. Libavius had little use, as we have seen,
for the school of Paracelsus, but it was indubitable to him that the Order
had sprung therefrom. I suppose that he held himself a Lutheran in the

239

-- Page 270 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

The hostility of Libavius offered a plain issue on the
part of a plain man, though somewhat dull of wit and
missing great opportunities, even when he discovered
errors and contradictions in Rosicrucian texts. It provoked
a reply on the part of Robert Fludd, who is the subject of
my next chapter. I refer to the Tractatus ApoLoceticus,
published at Leyden in 1617 to clear the Society from
“ the calumnies of Dom. Libavius and others of his kidney,”
but especially from charges of diabolical magic and super-
stition. The mistake of the German accuser was to regard
all magic and Kabalism as abominable arts and all astrology
as foolish; but the Brethren of the Rosy Cross were
concerned only with their higher aspects and practice.
The views of Libavius were, however, only a peg on which
Fludd suspended an elaborate discourse ; but the German
critic has the merit, such as it is, of having opened the
debate on its hostile side, and this in his own name. The
pamphlets which followed seem endless, but we know
them in most cases only by their titles in bibliographical
lists. Among those which I have been able to see or of
which it has been possible to find sufficient descriptions
a selection must be made, as it would serve little purpose to
analyse obscure pieces which do not count in the debate
on either side.

An anonymous Fama Remissa appeared in 1616, and the
title makes evident its hostility, the manifesto called
Fama being returned to those who had sent it forth.
There were in particular two reasons : (1) that the proposed
reformation of the whole world was ridiculous as well as
“ best sense’ of the Church of Luther, but the Rosicrucian expectation of
Paradise regained on earth connected it with the Anabaptist sect. A second
edition of WotmEINENDES BEpENKEN was printed at Erfurt in 1617. It must
be distinguished from D.O.M. A. Crux agsquz Cruces . . . Auctore Vito del
Capo de la Bona Speranza, 1617—a pamphlet of eight pages.

1 Fama Remissa ap Fratres Rose# Crucis, i616—sine loco. There was
no second edition.

240

-- Page 271 --
Development of Rosicrucian Literature
impracticable, and (z) that the religion of the Brotherhood
was abominable in the eyes of the writer. It must sub-
scribe to the Confession of Augsbourg in public and un-
mistakable terms before it could be regarded as organised
for the good of any reform in the German world. An
appendix discusses the doctrine of transubstantiation in
terms of Bedlam, but it is notable as indicating that at
this early stage there was a disposition to connect the Rosy
Cross with a peculiar teaching on the Mystery of the
Eucharist! The tract produced no answer from any
quarter, so far as J can trace: it may have commanded a
certain agreement in many directions at a period and in a
place which had partisans innumerable of the secret
sciences, and an audience for all claimants on this subject,
but no toleration whatever for the apostles of a secret
religion, which seemed to be represented by the Order.

Among the prophecies of Paracelsus there is one to which
I have adverted on several occasions, and previously in the
present work, as something that was taken into the heart
of all subsequent Hermetists : it is that which foretold the
coming of Elias the Artist, in whose glorious day whatsoever
had been hidden in the deeps would be proclaimed on the
heights, and by inference the secret science would be known
throughout the world.? So the alchemists looked for his
advent. There was, however, a tendency to believe that
Paracelsus himself, hailed by his admirers as the great
monarch of arcana, was in reality the expected Messiah of
Hermetic lore, otherwise Elias the Second. When the
Rosy Cross emerged in part from its penetralia by means of

1 Thave failed to meet with a later tract which appeared at Hanover in
1618 and may have carried the Eucharistic question further. This was
Syuuoce, an Hostia sit Verus Cibarius, a Fratribus Rosee Crucis donata
Rhumelio et Puello. The author was Theophilus de Pega, an assumed name.
The title is varied by Kloss.

2 Paracelsus; Opera Omnia. Geneva, Vol. II, 1658, in the treatise
De Mrneratigvs, and elsewhere in his writings.

R 241

-- Page 272 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
published documents, I infer that enthusiasts regarded it
as a corporate Elias, who would be therefore Elias the Third.
I account at least in this manner for the title selected by
a Silesian named Adam Bruxius when he wrote Etias
Tertius! in August, 1615, and published it in the following
year, as a “ judgment and opinion on the Most Illustrious
Order of the R .C -.,”’ in reply to the Fama and Conressio.
Whatever the analogy between the Rosicrucian promised
restoration of all things and the saving mission of the
promised grand adept, the Order for Adam Bruxius was
a false Elias and his judgment concerning it was uncom-
promising in hostility. The name of the Hermetic Messiah
was presumably talismanic and there were new editions
of the tract in 1618 and 1619.?. There is nothing otherwise
in the author’s record to indicate that he was concerned
with the zheosophia of his period, its theology or even
occultism, so why he intervened and pronounced judgment
on the Rosy Cross and what his warrants may have been
are questions to which no answer is forthcoming.

In 1617 a certain Johannes Sivertus came forward with
a proposal to strip off a fantastic mantle, mask or veil,
otherwise to produce a “Christian refutation”? of
Conressio FRATERNITATIS, and to prove that the new self-

1 Heras Tertius, das ist Urtheil oder Meinung von dem Hochl. Orden der
Briiderschaft des R’.C."., etc. 1616, sine loco.

2 The second and third editions suppress the name of the writer. That
of 1619 specifies the place of publication for the first time-—that is to say,
Frankfurt. Another Exias Artista was issued anonymously in the same
year at the same place and included “a benevolent judgment on the new
Brotherhood R.°.C..,” together with a reply to their two manifestoes,
namely, the Fama and Conressio. It isa German pamphlet of twelve pages,
signed L. C. There are references to Galatinus, who wrote Dr Arcanis
Caruotic# Veritatis, Reuchlin, Mirandula and to Paracelsus, especially
his Trnctrura Puysicorum, cap. 4, at the well-known point where Elias the
Artist is foretold.

3 EnTDDECKTE MuMMENSCHANTZE ODER NEBELKAPPEN, das ist, Christliche
Wiederlegung der negst von Cassel ausgeflogencvi Stimpelconfession, etc. 1617,
Sine loco.

242

-- Page 273 --
Development of Rosicrucian Literature
styled Brethren of the Rosy Cross neither came with a
mission from God nor belonged to Him, but were emissaries
of the Father of lies and working to the confusion of
discipline. I have no particulars concerning the writer,
and as more important criticisms were ignored it is difficult
to understand why H. S. F., described as philopbilos, should
have been at the pains of examining, discussing and
“‘ demolishing ” the arguments of Johann Sivert.t He did
more even than this, for he followed up Examrnatio
BrevissiMa with a second German pamphlet, containing
an equitable answer to the same attack.* ‘There is said
also to have been an Expranatory Letter on the subject
which may have been Sivert’s rejoinder, but it seems to
have been heard of and not seen,® or if seen has been for
some reason described only by the bare title.

I proceed now to a summary enumeration of certain
hostile critics who occupy a different position from those
already mentioned, because their attacks were answered
by writers claiming to testify concerning the Rosy Cross
from within the circle of its members. The earliest in
point of date is Henricus Neuhusius of Dantzic, some of
whose findings were dealt with by a writer using the
pseudonym of Eucharius Cygnus. Neuhusius is described
on his title-page as physician and philosopher. His Prous
anD Mosr Uszrut Apmonition‘ on the subject of the
Rosy Cross is more properly challengeable in respect of its

1 Examinatio Brevissima, das ist, Kirtzliche Erorterung, worinnen sich
Jou. Siverti im seiner... NEBELKAPPE wider die vom R..C.. zeimlich
verhauen, von H. 8. F. 1617, sine loco,

2 ANTIPANTZERFEGERIANUS, das ist, rechtmassige Antwort auf die Scharteke
Jou. Srverti, durch den Autorem der ExaminaTio. 1617, 5.1.

3 Episrora ComMeENntaTorIA, ber der Mummeuschantze. 1617, 5.1.

‘Pra ET UTILIssIMA ADMONITIO DE Fratripus R..C.. .. . Con-
scripta a Henrico Neuuusio, Dantiscano, Med. et Phil, Mag. Prostat apud
Chro, Vetter, 1618. A French translation appeared at Paris in 1623 under
the title of AvERTISSEMENT PIEUX ET TRES-UTILE des Fréres de la Rose-Croix,
escrit et mts en lumiére pour le bien public par Henrt Nevuneus ve Danrzic.

243

-- Page 274 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
statements rather than a hostile tract. It deals especially
with the purpose of the Fama Frarternitatis, real or
alleged. A preliminary question is one which we know to
have been exercising the German world, though I have
indicated that prior to 1619, when Neuhusius wrote,
there was a sense in which it was settled. The question
was whether the Order had any existence in fact. He
propounds the question and answers in the affirmative,
producing also his proofs, namely, that he had met with
members. The next question is as to what manner of men
they were, but he was not in their particular confidence,
he was not within their circle, and though his note is one
of warning there is no grave or specific charge. He dwells
most on Rosicrucian religion and thinks the Brethren open
to the accusation that they were Anabaptists or even Jews.
There is a word also on their horror of Latin Christianity
and their disinclination to mix with persons of that faith.
There are, further, indications that he regarded the Rosi-
crucian projected reformation as almost connoting revolu-
tion. In fine, however, he reports the removal of the
Order to India, presumably a derisive commentary on its
manifold activities at the period in the German press.
Eucharius Cygneus replied in Conspricit1um Notitra,}
the “Observatory of Knowledge” in question being
presumably the Order House of the Holy Spirit. The
admonition of Neuhusius was in his opinion futile. I do
not think that the admonition matters greatly, or the answer.

A more notable opponent of the Order wrote under the
name of F. G. Menapius, who has been identified as
Johannes Valentinus Alberti—according to Biihle and others
—a personal friend of Andrex. ‘There are alternative

1 Consricinium Notitim, inserviens oculis egris, qui lumen veritatis
ratione subjecti, objectt, medii et finis ferre recusant. Oppositum Admonttiont
futili Henrict Nevunusir de Fratribus R..C’. ab Eucuario Cycno
PHILADELPHO ET PHILALETHEO. 1619, 5.1. .

244

-- Page 275 --
Development of Rosicrucian Literature
attributions, but one and all seem hypothetical in the
highest degree. His first attack on the Society was written
under date of June 3, 1617, and was in Latin, a German
version following on July 15. This is certain from par-
ticulars furnished by Florentinus de Valentia, who in the
autumn of the same year replied to the “ inconsiderate
calumnies ” by issuing Rosa Fiorescens ;1 but I have been
unable to trace under what title Menapius opened the
debate.2 Valentia wrote as “ an unworthy servant of the
Blessed Order of the Rosy Cross.” In the case under notice
the kind of service connoted membership, and it must be
said that Valentia, whose Rosicrucian accent is eloquent,
appears as an adept rather than a mere initiate.* In his
manner and in the impression that he creates, he is much
more important than Eucharius. But it is to be observed
that Menapius himself, his hostility notwithstanding, also
made a claim upon membership, as we shall see. On
November 29 he replied to the response of Valentia, and
his pamphlet appeared at Cologne in 1618.4 The controversy

1 Rosa Frorescens, contra F, G. Menapn calumnias, das ist, Kurtzer
Bericut unD WipERANTWoRT, auff die sub dato 3 Funti, 1617, ex agro Norico
in Latein, und dann folgends den 15 Fulii obgedachten Fabres Teutsch publicirte
unbedachte calumnias F. G. Menapn, wider die R..C.. Societet, durch
Florentinum de Valentia, Ord. Bened, minimum clientem. Francofurti, ipsts
nundinis autumnalibus, 1617. Further editions appeared in 1618 and 1619.
The calumnies of Menapius—among other impeachments—described the
Brethren not only as sorcerers and black magicians, but as incarnate demons.

2 Jt has been described as a printed letter which terms the Order a
faction of men qut sceleribus suis, non benedictam et roseam sed malam crucem
promereantur.

3 T must not be understood to mean that the rejoinder contains anything
of real importance as an exposition of the Order or from any other point
of view. T’o serve God, to discover the arcana of Nature, to promote true
faith in Christ and Divine Glory are the aims of Brethren. Those who love
God and therefore live to please Him are few in the world, and they should be
like Adam in Paradise. The secrecy of the Order is defended, as a part of
which its manifestoes appeared anonymously.

4 Anticrisis ad Responsum FLorENTINI DE VALENTIA, das ist, Kurtze
Duplic und Defension auff die Widerantwort, Replic, oder Confutation der
Missiven, von F. G. Menarius, unlengst an die R. C. abgangen, etc. 1618.

245

-- Page 276 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
closed at this point, so far as Valentia was concerned,}
but it was not otherwise the end of the matter, for in
April, 1619, Theophilus Schweighardt, acting as Secretary
of the Order—and of whom we shall hear further—
issued a pamphlet entitled Menarirus Rosrm Crucis,?
which (1) posed for consideration the question whether
that pseudonymous writer should be regarded as a
Brother, presumably in accordance with his claim;
(z) cited him to appear at a full meeting of “our
Supreme Council” on account of having slandered
Valentia—not, it will be observed, the Order; and (3)
summoned all members of the Rosy Cross to attend at its
Invisible Stronghold. Ex bypothesi, initiates would know the
locality of the Stronghold and so also would Menapius,
if his claim was genuine, but it does not appear that they
and he were commanded on a specific date. There is no
account of what followed, if indeed anything, but the
name of Menapius is not heard of subsequently in the
arena of public debate.®

Florentinus de Valentia also “fell into himself and was
missing ever after,” but his intervention places us in a
better position regarding the claims of the Order if we can
accept him at his own valuation as a witness from within
the secret circle. His affirmations fall unawares into two
categories, of which the first is purely mythical, otherwise

1 J should add that Menapius made two further attacks in Cznro
VirGILIANUs DE Fratrisus R.°.C.*., authore F. G. Menapro, published with
Centro Ovipianus pe Frarrisus R.”.C."., auctore F. GEntporp, cognomento
Gometz Menarius. 1618, 5.1, They are known to me by their titles only.

2 Menarius Rosem Crucis, das ist, Bedenken der Gesambten Societet von
dem verdeckten und ungenandten scribtore F.G.Mrnapio. . . . Auff gnddigen
Befehl der Hochl. Societet publicirt von Turopuito ScuweicHarpt, Ord.
Bened, Grafiren, im April, 1619.

3 The pamphlet of Schweighardt is almost obviously a piece of farcical
writing, but a question arises as to what may be behind it, considered as the
final result in print of two Rosicrucian initiates falling foul of one another,
an example to be followed by others—as we shall see—almost concurrently,

246

-- Page 277 --
Development of Rosicrucian Literature
occult fooling, unless a symbolical significance can be
assumed. The mirrors of Archimedes, the automata of
Roger Bacon and Albertus Magnus, the use and com-
position of the wheel of Pythagoras, the everburning fire,
perpetual motion, the quadrature of the circle, the
key of the music of Nature and the harmony of all things
are among the treasures possessed by the Order. The
explanation is that those who understand the characters
and signatures which God has inscribed in the great book
of the cosmos, and who contemplate the origin and inter-
connection of creatures, will discover things that seem
impossible to the hostile critic. But the enumerations of the
second category belong to a different class. It is said that
the Brethren seek the Kingdom of God and regeneration in
Jesus Christ ; that they study the Book of life; that they
hearken to the Spiritual Word in a still Sabbath. The
explanation is that the book which contains all things is
within us; that it is this which leads the wise into all
knowledge ; that the Word is the Wisdom of God, His
image, His spirit, His law ; that this is the Christ in man ;
and that the part of those who would attain is the resigna-
tion of their will to God, seeking before all things for His
Kingdom to reign within them. It is like the voice of
THEOLoGIA Germanica, behind which is the voice of
Tauler, and we shall see in the next chapter that the Rosy
As regards Menapius, he was so well acquainted with the Order, according
to his claim, that when he wrote in the first instance, it was possible for him
to describe the habitation of the Rosy Cross in a decorative fable. It was a
castle encompassed by clouds and apparently built upon a rock supported by
four pillars and approached by seven marble steps. The rock being
surrounded by deep water formed a sort of island and was reached by a boat
covered with a blue canopy, the master and his servants being clothed in red
mantles. Those who would reach the castle had to pass the Tower of
Uncertainty and the Perilous Tower, to vanquish a wolf and a goat, after
which they had free entrance and received the reward of their labours. They
were crowned by a virgin, clothed in a robe of yellow silk and enthroned in
heavenly and earthly magnificence.

247

-- Page 278 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
Cross was understood after this manner by its great English
exponent, Robert Fludd.

In 1618 an entirely unknown person—Mundus Christo-
phori Filius—produced a polemic in quarto, called obscurely
enough GrEAsE FoR THE Fatt,} otherwise observations on
“the craft and knavery of the newly constituted Brother-
hood of the R..C..,” which brought forth a reply, also
anonymous but ascribed to Irenzus Agnostus, who, as we
shall see, was another official apologist and the most prolific
of all. This was Specutum Consranti#,? the said mirror
being otherwise an exhortation to steadfastness and
firmness addressed to all and sundry ‘‘ whose names have
been submitted to the Holy and Blessed Fraternity,’’ lest
they should be led away by “‘ certain wicked and perverse
writings.” Mundus rejoined in 1619 with Rosem Crucis
Frater Turasonico-Menpax,? being a response to the
alleged libel of the Mirror or Constancy, described as
“put in circulation recently by a so-called Rosicrucian ”
and directed against his own “ catholic treatise.” The
result in due course was Vinpic1® RHoDOSTAUROTICZ,!
issued by Irenzus Agnostus under date of September § in
that year and described as a radical denial of the insults,
defamations, lies and calumnies spread abroad by Mundus,
son of Christophoros, against the Illustrious Society.

The debate closed at this point, but it leaves us confronted
by a very curious problem, because GrEasE FoR THE Fay
claims in the first place to have been compiled at the

1 Speck aurr per Faux, das ist, List und Betrug der newenstandenen
Briiderschaft oder Frat. derervom R..C.., durch Munpum Curistopuori Fin,

2 Spscucum Constantia, das ist, eine nohtwendige Vermabnung an die
jenige, so ibre Namen bereits bey der heiligen, gebenedeiten Frat. dess R.C.
angegeben, etc. 1618, 5.2.

3 Rose@ Crucis Frater Turasonico-Mznpax, das ist, Verlogner
Rhumbsichtiger R..C.. Bruder, oden Verantwortung auff die Skartecken
Specutt Constantia, etc. 1619, 5.1.

‘ Vinvici# Ruopvostavrotica, das ist, Warhaffter Gegenbericht der
Gottseligen Frat. dess R’.C.'., etc. 1619, 5.1.

248

-- Page 279 --
Development of Rosicrucian Literature
solicitation of a highly distinguished person, not otherwise
specified, and to have been written in the second place
Permissu Superiorum, which can signify only the licence
of the Order itself. This notwithstanding, the preface
proceeds forthwith to affirm that the Brethren are judged
out of their own mouths and by their own writings, though
Mundus adds that he does not attack their morals or even
their curious arts. In the eight chapters comprised by the
tract he marshals his alleged evidence, based (1) on the
origin and founders of the Order; (2) their religious
belief ; (3) their opinion of “ papal holiness”; (4) their
worldly policy ; and (5) their occult claims. As regards the
matter of faith, they are a sect equivalent to Anabaptists,
not Christian in the true sense, which is that of the Catholic
Church. It is evident throughout that Mundus, though
self-described as a lover of pansophia, belonged to the old
religion. In respect of “the purse of Fortunatus” and the
“Parergon of gold-making,” the Brethren “ promised
more in front than was to be seen behind.” The conclusion
is that there is nothing to warrant anyone in abandoning
the Catholic Faith to join the Rosicrucian Society. Mundus
cites the testimony of an alleged Brother, according to
which he was on probation for over seven years before
he was received into the Order. The tract on the
Turasonian Liar terms Ireneus Agnostus, firstly, a
vainglorious Brother and, secondly, a self-styled Rosi-
crucian. It warns everyone against falling into the
heretical trap, its position otherwise being summed up in
the following lines :

Quod ergo scit Rosez Crucis Frater? Nihil
Quam quod crepat creata cuncta esse ex tribus,
Sale, alazothe, foetidoque sulphura.
On the surface, therefore, we are in the presence of two
Brethren denouncing one another, owing to their divergent
249

-- Page 280 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
views about an Order to which both belong. But if we
elect to decide that Mundus gave false testimony when he
implied the fact of his membership, we shall find ourselves
shortly facing another problem respecting Irenzeus himself.

When Mundus ceased from testifying, he was replaced in
the lists by Isaran susp Cruce, who attacked Irenzus
Agnostus in Mrracuta Natur4,! otherwise seven admirable
mysteries regarded hereunto as fabulous, owing to “ the
philosophical and astronomical operations ” of the RC ...,
who are yet designated as a “ highly illuminated Fraternity.”
Isaiah undertakes to shed new light on the “ seven wonders ”
in question. The pseudonymous writer has been identified
—speculatively or otherwise—as a professor of Latin at
Ulm, namely, Zimpert Wehe. On June 13, 1619, Irenzus
Agnostus came forward with TintrnnaBuLUM SoPHoRuM,?
being “a further and fundamental discovery of the
godly and blessed Fraternity ” and of the illustrious Order,
chiefly directed against the self-styled Athenian satan suB
Cruces, but also condemning the Specutum as written in
extravagant and ironical terms. It would seem therefore
that the latter tract has been ascribed in error to Irenzus.
On August 18 Isaiah completed his VIII Miracu.um Artis,®
the alleged eighth wonder comprising a “ fundamental,
perfect and decisive revelation ” of many arcana concerning
“natural, supernatural and infra-natural sciences,” but
embodying for the most part a “ condign declaration ”
on the last tract of Ireneus. It includes also and curiously

1 Miracuta Natura, das ist sieben iiberaus treffliche, sonderbare und
bisher unerhirie Arcanen und Wunderwerke der Natur, durch Hisaiam sus
Cruce Ath., etc. Strassburg, 1619.

2 TinrinnasuLum Sopnorum, das ist, Fernere griindliche entdeckung
der gottseligen, gesegneten Briiderschaft dess loblichen Orden dess R. C., etc.
Niirnberg, 1619,

3 VII Miracutum Artis, das ist, griindliche, vollkommene und endliche
Offenbarung vieler Geheimnussen, so wol in Natiirlichen, als iiber und under
Natirlichen Wissenschaften, etc. Strassburg, 1619.

250

-- Page 281 --
Development of Rosicrucian Literature
che horoscope of Irenzus Agnostus, who illustrated his
mdefatigable zeal for the Order on three further occasions.
Under date of October 21, 1619, he issued a “ brief but
well-founded refutation of every charge brought falsely
and wickedly against the Brotherhood by Isatau sus Cruce.
The general title was Apotocia Fratrum R..C ..1 It was
followed on April 13, 1620, by Propromus FRaTERNITATIS
R..C..,? the Herald or Messenger announcing the speedy
advent of a great Apotocia in detail for the further exposure
of Isaiah’s fabulous stories. ‘The promise was fulfilled
under date of July 30 by the publication of Liszr T, or
alternatively Porrus TRaNQUILLITATIS,? recalling, and
intended to recall obviously, that “ parchment inscribed
T ” found in the tomb of “ our careful and wise Father,”
when the early Brethren beheld his body in the tomb.
It may be remembered that this was their ‘‘ greatest
treasure ”’ after the Bible, and was to be protected from “the
censure of the world.” ‘The tract of Irenzus may have
signified a precious possession to those whom it concerned,
but was more by its own claim, that is to say, a “‘magnifi-
cent and most consoling relation concerning that Supreme
Good which, having been so highly desired, has been at length
and recently obtained by those who have renounced the

1 Apotocia Frat. R.*.C.., das ist, Kurtze, jedoch wabrhafte und
woblbegriindte Ablebnung aller der Beschuldigung, die in verwichener Frank-
furter Herbstmass, von Hisata sus Cruce ATHEN, falschlich und bosshafftigklich
beschwert worden, etc. 1619. There was a second edition at Nuremberg in
1620.

2 Propromus F..R..C.*., das ist, ern vorgeschmack und beylauffige Anzeig
der grossen aussfibrlichen Apologi, etc. 1620, sine loco.

3 Liser T.. oder Portus Tranouiniiratis. Durch Irenmus Acnostus.
1620, sine loco. If this tract fulfilled one promise of Propromus it
left another in suspension, namely, a new commentary on Genesis, which
was to unfold. the true matter of the heavens and the universe, explain
how water is coagulated, etc. It has been said that the reference is
almost unquestionably to Gutmann’s Revetarions or Divine Majzsry,
which deals with these subjects, but this work had appeared already at
Frankfurt in 1619.

251

-- Page 282 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
Papacy and have been admitted into the Order and
College of the RC ...772

The debate ended at this point on the part of all dis-
putants. We hear nothing further of Isaiah, Irenzus passes
from the field, though we shall recur to him immediately
in connection with other writings, and—real or alleged—
the official publications of the Order were soon to be
suspended for nigh on one hundred years. The con-
troversial side of these documents has been now dealt
with as fully as my materials permit, and it is necessary
to retrace our steps for the purpose of my fourth section
and its further illustrations of the Order as affirmed and
explained by itself, premising that in all cases the official
character is that which can be ascribed to individual
expositors testifying from within the secret circle: they
are distinguished in this manner from Fama and Conressio.

(1) The earliest in point of time was a Swiss Protestant
theologian named Goetz, who was ruined by alchemical
experiments and leaving his debts behind him in his native
land because a resident of Marburg. In 1614, under the
name of Raphael Eglinus, he published at Frankfurt an
Assertio Fraternitatis R..C..,2 in which he termed
himself soczus ejus, a Companion of the Brotherhood.
Prior to this he is said to have written a Disqutsirio DE

1 According to the Apotocia of Irenzus, the Order existed long before
Christian Rosy Cross, whose office was one of reconstruction. The legend of
the Fama is thus demolished in a sentence. It is added, moreover, that
C..R..C.. knew everything in temporal philosophy but was deficient in
matters of faith, for which reason he was no more the founder of the
Brotherhood than Solomon—the explanation of this statement being that
“ doctrines exist before their human representatives.” He that has ears to
hear this kind of reasoning must be left to hear.

? Assertio Fraternitatis R..C.'., quam Rosee Crucis vocant, a quodam
Fraternitatis ejus socio carmine expressa. Francofurti, 1614. The imprint
of Bringer the publisher appears on the title-page. He appears to have been
the chief Rosicrucian bookseller in that city. There was a second edition of
the Assertio in the following year, and it was translated into German and

252

-- Page 283 --
Development of Rosicrucian Literature
Hetra Artista which appeared at Leipsic in 1606 and has
been falsely affirmed to contain Rosicrucian references.’
The Assertio is a Latin metrical discourse which at this
early date alludes to adventurers claiming a connection with
the Order and affirms, for the rest, that its name is not to be
identified with that of the founder.? The publication of
Tue Cuemica, Nuptiats of Frater Christianus Rosencreutz,
in 1616 is a notable commentary on this statement.

(2) The second and by far the most interesting exposition
on. the affirmative side of debate, is an Ecuo or THE Gop-
IttuminaTeD BroTHERHOOD OF THE VENERABLE ORDER
R..C..,3 dated November 1, 1615, and published at
Dantzic in that year, the reputed author being Julius
Sperber, whose collection of Kasatistrc Prayers had
appeared at Magdebourg so far back as 1600.4 The Ecuo
published at Dantzic in 1616 and 1617, So far back as 1591 there had
appeared at Tiguri a tract entitled Orarro pe Concorpi Frarrum
Socrerare. Ps, cxxxili celebrata: in solennit ecclesia Antistitum, Pro-
fessorum et Studiosorum conventu Tiguri d Raruarix Ecuino, alumnorum
collegit Tigurini Pedagogo, babita. It was a commentary of seven pages in
small quarto on the three verses beginning: Ecce quam bonum et jucundum.

1 The full title is Hetropuizus Puitocuemicus: Disgutsitio de HEita
Artista, in qua de Metallarum Transmutatione, addressus Arce. et PERERII
Fesuitarum Opiniones, evidenter et solide disseritur. It appeared at Frankfurt
in 1606 and at Marburg in 1608, being described in both cases as editio
postrema correctior et melior, but I am unacquainted with its earlier biblio-
graphical history. The preface raises the following pertinent question
regarding the Heavenly Jerusalem: Sz urbs est aurum, et eadem est pellucida
ut vitrum, ergo quiddam quod est substantia et nature aurea, quod est pellucidum
instar vitri. The tract has also certain Hermetic Canons on the spirit, soul
and body of the greater and lesser world. It is unnecessary to say that the
Rosicrucians are mentioned nowhere, nor do I know why the anonymous
work is ascribed to Eglinus.

2 There appears to have been another AsserTio attached to a Cassel
edition of Fama er Conressio in 1616 and claiming to be official in character,
but I have met with no copy.

3 Ecno der von Gott Hocherleuchteten Fraternitet des Léblichen Ordens
R..C."., etc... . Danzig, Andreas Hiinefeldt, 1615.

4 He is described as of Anhalt, Dessau. It is to be noted that Lenglet du
Fresnoy catalogues two alchemical works under the name of Julius Sperberus,
both appearing at Hamburg, respectively in 1672 and 1674, and both

253

-- Page 284 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
claimed to embody (1) absolute proof that the statements
of Fama and Conressio are possible and true; (z) that the
facts have been commonly familiar to certain God-fearing
people for more than nineteen years; (3) that they are
on record in secret writings; and (4) that the evidence is
a “magical letter”? issued by the Venerable Brotherhood
and printed in the German language—referring presumably
to the Fama. Were these promises fulfilled the beginnings
of the Rosicrucian Order would antecede the completion of
Naometria and belong possibly to the activities of the
Militia Crucifera Evangelica, but unhappily the proof is
wanting! That which is furnished, however, is a second
preface under the date 1597, which may not be so
manifestly fraudulent as appears on the surface and
is meant to indicate an embryonic state of the Order
at that time. It recommends the establishment of a Fra-
ternity or the erection of some great College, but there is no
reference to Christian Rosy Cross or his own traditional
foundation. Apart from my hypothesis concerning it,
there is no purpose in the document,? but from this point
entitled Isacoce, the first concerning the true knowledge of the Triune God
and of Nature, the second on the matter of the Philosophical Stone and its
use. They are presumably posthumous writings. Sperber is said to have
died in 1616.

1 The German historian of Freemasonry, Findel, considered that the
Ecuo is not unimportant for the origin of the Swedish Rite, apparently
because he traced in it some vestiges or reminiscences of the Order of Knights
Templar. The opinion in either case is not likely to be shared by those who
know the tract, the most important point in which is the sincerity with
which it seems to be imbued.

2 Tt cites Agidius Gutmann of Suabia and his Revezations or Divine
Magssry, published in 1619 and thus antedated by twenty-two years. He is
described as a wise man who was a lover of God and his work is compared in
respect of value to the traditional seventy volumes which God dictated to
the prophet by His angel. There is no question that the ReveLaTions were
of great moment in the mind of the Rosy Cross and this panegyric appearing
four years before the volumes were printed shews that it was known in
manuscript previously, like the Fama itself. There is evidence otherwise of
the fact, as we have seen.

254

-- Page 285 --
Devetopment of Rosicrucian Literature

of view it is easy to understand why in addition to the
proposition itself there comes—at the end of the tract—
a schedule of the Laws which should govern it. The first
or later preface is addressed to the Brothers R..C.., and
implores them in the Name of the Holy Trinity to meet
together and teach the True Light to the world, being
that of Holy Scripture and of Nature, according to their
secret meaning. The Conressto had just furnished the
German world with the birth-date of him whom the
Fama calls the “ chief and original of our Fraternity,” but
the text of the Ecuo makes short work of a claim so modest
by affirming that the first Rosicrucian of the Old Testament
was Adam, while Simeon was the last. One is disposed to
speculate whether the early Masonic literatt who said
practically the same thing of their own Brotherhood had
taken a lead from the Ecuo.

The antiquity of the Order being such, it might be
supposed to have spread widely in the long course of the
ages, but the recipients of its wisdom are described as few,
owing to insufficiency of zeal in the quest of Divine Things.
The analogy cited is the great audiences that heard the
Christ of Nazareth and the three among all who were chosen
to learn the deep mysteries of His teaching, namely, Peter,
James and John. It was these also and only to whom
it is said that “He shewed the same vision which God
had granted to Elias and Moses,” meaning the Trans-
figuration. The Divine Wisdom being the antithesis of the
wisdom of this world, it follows that the hidden theosophia
can be revealed only to those who renounce the sapientia
mundana, the world which cleaves thereto and the fleshly
lusts thereof. It appears, for the rest, that Christ, who
came not to destroy but to fulfil, maintained the old
tradition of the Rosy Cross—otherwise, of the Ancient
Mysteries—and in establishing a new College of Magic
did not depart therefrom. The Laws of the Order,

255

-- Page 286 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
according to the Ecuo,! reflect apparently from this source,
but they are more properly golden counsels and, of course,
familiar in our mouths as the proverbial household words
or the teachings of the Sermon on the Mount. To be
faithful, modest and obedient ; to love the neighbour and
share our fortune with him; to respect the secret studies
and keep silence regarding them: hereof is the yoke imposed
on those who would follow in the footsteps of Christian
Rosy Cross. We are far indeed from the Fama and that
anti-papal spirit which succeeded the Reformation in
Conressio Fraternitatis R..C... Other rules of conduct
impose the fear of God as the root and crown of wisdom ;
the will to discipline; piety, purity and holy horror of sin;
prudence and equipoise ; contempt of riches; realisation
of this world’s friendship as connoting enmity with God;
disesteem of human wisdom and foresight ; ardent desire
for Divine Wisdom; and gratitude towards one’s own
master. In the following of this path it may be that a
disciple will find in the inward and secret sense of the
Word of God that there are Great Mysteries which are
undreamed by those who cleave to the external meaning
of Scripture, and that—God willing—those who seek for
His light in all sincerity will indeed find the light, an
illumination at once temporal and eternal for the desiring
soul.

The Ecuo, for the rest, affirms three classes of Magic, of
which only the first is lawful: it is called Magia Celestis,
and this is Divina Sapientia. The second is Magia Humana,
defined as Platonic doctrine, presumably the wisdom of
man atits highest. ‘The third is superstitious and diabolical,
using conjurations and charms: it includes necromancy.

1 The Ecuo was reprinted, or at least reissued, at Dantzic in 1616, again
in 1620, and finally in 1656. The work is divided into twenty-one chapters,
which treat of Divine Wisdom, its origin and source, the means by which it
ig attained and the fruit which comes therefrom.

256

-- Page 287 --
Development of Rosicrucian Literature
The Magic which is of heaven is Magic which comes from
God and tends to union with Him. It gives true under-
standing concerning the sacred writings, with gifts of
vision, revelation and working of miracles. The tract adds
that those who are proficient in Magic of this denomination
are few and far between, because infidelity advances with
rapid strides, the teaching of Christ is neglected, religious
devotion turns more and more to the outward side—as if
to that letter which killeth—and in its activities to the
acquisition of ecclesiastical possessions, understood as the
goods of this world.

The Ecuo is altogether an important official document,
and I am disposed to believe that something lay behind
the seeming fraud of its predated supplementary preface.
I mean that there was something fermenting in the
hiddenness at the end of the sixteenth century, of which
Simon Studion was a mouthpiece and that it was growing
up into manifestation between 1604 and 1614.

(3) The year which produced the Ecuo saw also the publi-
cation of a certain Open Lerrer under the name of
Julianus de Campis. It defended the Order against
accusations abroad in the world, but they were those
of ecclesiastical censure rather than of Libavius. The
representatives of German theology were informed that
the Order was beyond their province because it was a group
of theosophists and not of theologi. It was the repository,
moreover, of a secret art, in comparison with which the
praise or blame of the world could count for nothing.
The tract was addressed to all who had heard, by report or
otherwise, of the new Brotherhood and admonished them
not to be influenced when judgments were delivered by the
ignorant. The writer testified (1) that he was himself a
member of the Order ; (2) that he had met only with three
other members in all his travels; and (3) that presumably
they were the sum total of those then on earth who were

8 257

-- Page 288 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
worthy to possess its mysteries. Itfollowed that many com-
pete for the pearl of great price, but those are few who gain
it. It followed also that there could not be said to be any
definitely incorporated society. The position of Julianus
de Campis might have been enviable for those who could
tolerate his claim, but on our part we need observe only that
his open letter stultifies Fama and Conrxssro still more
than the Ecuo. Where now is the House of the Holy
Spirit, and where even are those who put forward the first
manifestoes, that the Jiteratz and others of Europe might
judge thereon? It is answered only that the incorporation
of the Order and its Co.iecrum will come to pass in the
future. Notwithstanding these difficulties Julianus found
favour with two other claimants to initiation whom we
shall meet shortly. He is cited by Theophilus Schweig-
hardt and quoted by the author of Frater Crucis Rosatz.!

(4) As a rejoinder to various slanders, not otherwise
specified, Theophilus Schweighardt of Constance, who has
been identified as Daniel Mégling, produced under date of
June 1, 1617, a tract entitled Panpora Sexrm Aitartis,?
otherwise SpecuLuUM GratT1, which claimed to communicate
the whole art and science of the Brotherhood established by
Christian Rosencreutz, to trace its development and to
shew that it could be utilised without endangering health
of body or soul. ‘There is further ascribed to Schweighardt

1 Mr. F. N. Pryce has drawn my attention to a Curisis ap Lecrorem,
signed by Julianus de Campis and placed between the dedication and
preface in Terras Cuymiarrica, by Arnold Kerner, published at Erfurt in
1618. Itisa violent attack on Andrew, under the name of Menippus, because
he had published a tract so entitled, as we have seen, in that year. Ad Orcum,
ad Orcum, Menippe, cum tuis comitibus is an exclamation which strikes the
keynote. There are also references to the Fama. The plausible explanation
is that Julianus attacked Andree because he was an enemy of the Order,
and I must suppose that this is how it stands.

2 Panpora Sext@ /Eratis, sive Specutum Gratia, das ist, die Ganze
Kunst und Wissenschaft der von Gott hoch erleuchteten Fraternitet CHRISTIAN!
RosenkreuTz . . . Durch Tueornitum ScnwziGHaRDT. 1617, sine loco.

258

-- Page 289 --
Development of Rosicrucian Literature

a Descriptio FraTEernitatis R ..C .., anno 1618, according to
Kloss. His name is connected also on the same authority with
another work of 1618 entitled Specutum Sopuicum Ruopo-
Srauroticum,! dedicated to all those who, being eager for
true wisdom, await further information on the Brotherhood
of Christian Rosencreutz. The author describes himself as
Dei gratia tertriunius catholice Promotor indignus—i.e.
Promotor Ordinis. Tis discourse concerns the College of
the Order and its axioms, understood as an extension of
knowledge.? It is addressed to the “ imbecile ” followers
of Zoilus, as accusing critics, but for their everlasting
shame and scorn. We hear also that aspirants sought
instruction concerning the Order among booksellers and
engravers. I have dealt already with the last publication
of Schweighardt when, in his alleged official capacity, he
cited F. G. Menapius before the Council of the Order.®

1 The title continues: Das ist, Weitliuffige Entdechung dess Collegii und
Axtomatum von der sondern erleuchten Fraternitatis CurtstiaAN1 RosENKREUTZ
... 1618,

2 T should add here that “an unnamed but notable Companion of the
Fraternity ” published at Frankfurt in 1617 a “ fundamental relation ” of the
designs and objects of the Order: GriinpiicHer Bericut von dem V orhaben,
Gelegenheit und Inhalt der Léblichen Bruderschaft des R.'.C.",. His initials
were E. D. F., O..C.R..Sen. It contains a parable concerning the
Mountain of the Wise, to which I shall recur subsequently.

3 The auther of the Srecuzum would seem to have regarded the
Imiratio Curisti, and especially its first chapter, as the chief key to the
Rosy Cross. ‘Those who conformed their life exactly thereto would be
visited by a Brother, bearing the Parergon of the Order. It it explained that
the Ergon is purification of spirit, glorification of God on earth. It is the
work of all true Christians as well as of the Brotherhood. The Ergon is
otherwise the right eye of the soul, by which it looks to the eternal; the left
eye looks towards time, and thisis the Parergon—the criterion of things good
and evil for the life of the body. The College of the Holy Spirit, according
to Schweighardt, is not less marvellous than the Castle described by
Menapius. It is suspended in the air wheresoever God wills, for it is He
Who directs it. It is mobile and immobile, stable and unstable, goes on
wheels but also on wings. The Brethren have the gift of ubiquity and
are nearer to the seeker than he thinks. The Panpora speaks of Virgin
Wisdom and her garden, which must be traversed to attain the end of the
great research.

259

-- Page 290 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

(5) The most important and problematical of all the
apologists is he whose acquaintance we have made under
the pseudonym of Irenzus Agnostus, and we have seen that
he wrote many pamphlets in reply to Munpus and Isarau sup
Cruce. They do not, however, exhaust his contributions
to the Order subject. It is possible that we meet with
him for the first time as J. Ireneus, that “ disciple of
Divine Wisdom,” who addressed—as we have seen—a letter
to the Order on December 3, 1615, and it appeared at
Frankfurt some time in the following year.1. He has been
accredited, but by mere affirmation only, with the author-
ship of some “ philosophical revelations ”? communicated
to the Brotherhood in 1619. The discourse in question
actually appeared under the name of Rhodophilus Stauro-
phorus, August, 1618, but this designation is pseudonymous
like that of Irenzus and therefore affords no light. Under
date of March 16, 1619, he would seem to have issued
Frater NON Frater,? exhorting the Rosicrucian adepti
to be on their strict guard against pretended Brethren and
false prophets, who are going up and down in the world
wearing the mask of the Society. There had been warnings
of this kind previously, as for example the Anwetsunc! of
1616, published at Frankfurt, which “ indication ” pointed
a straight way to the Brotherhood of the R..C.. and
included an instruction to those postulants of the Order
who had antecedently entreated it to beware of false

1 Ad Venerandos, Doctissimos et Illuminatissimos Viros Dom Fratres
Sancte Rose@ Crucis Evistora J. Eipyvatov, Divini Sophie Alumni. 1616.

2 Raptus Puitosoruicus, das ist, Philosophische Offenbarungen, etc. 1619,
sine loco, The author narrates a vision in which a virgin presented him 4
book called Azotu, signed with the letters F, R. and treating of Magic,
Hermetic Medicine, Philosophy and Mathematics.

8 Frater non Frarer, das ist, eine Hochnothdiirflige Vermanung an die
Gottselige, fromme Discipul der gebenedeyten Societet des R..C.., dass sé
sich fiir den falchen Briidern und Propheten fleissig vorsehen, etc. 1619, 5.1.
oe pes Recuren Wecs zu DER FRATERNITET DES R.’.C."., ete.

260

-- Page 291 --
Development of Rosicrucian Literature
brethren. But it must be added that Irenzus pretended
to furnish the particular marks and signs by which true
members might be distinguished indubitably from such
persons."

A tract entitled Cuypzeum Veriratis, otherwise THE
Sure.p or Trutu, which appeared early in 1618, is a typical
deliberation on the pro et contra side, and I am taking it
out of due order as it connects with the next tract. It
claims (1) to deal with everything which “ hereunto has
been set forth openly, either for or against the Most
Honourable and Blessed Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross,”
and (2) to exhibit once and for all that which zealous
disciples may expect confidently therefrom. The author
in this case also was Irenzus Agnostus, who subscribes
himself (1) as writing from Tunis on February 21 of the
year mentioned, (2) by special command of the glorious
Brotherhood, he being (3) its “‘ unworthy notary ” through-
aut Germany. It affirms (1) that our highest good and
way to the blessed life lies in the knowledge of God; (2)
that the man who is devoted to the word of God is ever
proceeding further in the quest of wisdom; and (3) that
‘earning must be maintained for the propagation of
celestial doctrine. In some manner which must have
deen conclusive to the writer himself these considerations
ead up to the Christian and theological reflections of
‘ our Society,” which testifies its approval of what Michael
Maier delivered from a solid foundation and “ published
n our defence,” referring apparently to his enumeration

1 The signs were: (1) unity of doctrine ; (2) modesty of garb; (3) taci-
urnity, beneficence, humility, chastity ; (4) power to cure leprosy, gout,
upilepsy and cancer. But Irenzus adds fabulous things, viz. the possession
f two instruments called respectively Cosmolethrentes and Astronikita. By
he first any building could be destroyed, and the second enabled the user to
ze the stars through clouds. Other warrants were the gifts of interpreting
reams and discerning things to come. Finally, the Brethren know every-
hing contained in books, yet they appear of small consequence outwardly,

261

-- Page 292 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

of other Colleges of Wisdom in past ages. As regards the
teaching of the Order it has been inherited through a valid
and unbroken succession; it is the custodian of things
hitherto regarded as lost; its vocation is to bring errant
wanderers to the light of virtuous and true knowledge ;
it has never designed that all men should accept its teaching
“before the end of the world,” but those alone who from
the beginning have been called thereto by God. As the
foolish old Masonic literati declared that their Speculative
Art began in the Garden of Eden, so is it said—like the
Ecuo—that the succession of the Rosy Cross goes back to
“our first father Adam,” descending from him to “ our
still surviving president, Hugo Alverda.”

The intermediate custodians of the Mysteries were
Seth, Enoch, and Noah, with other familiar names according
to the normal transmission of the Secret Tradition in
Israel, so forward to Christian times, the succession in
which I will give at length as follows: Philo, Rabbi ben
Thema, Schmuel Jarchinas, R. Asse Rabbena, Marcus
Eremitas, Dado Episcopus Rotamagensis, Beda, Walafrid,
Archbishop Turpin, Moses bar Kephas, Almansor, Peter
Damian, Hugo de Saint Victor, Rabbi M. Maimon,
Abraham aben Ezra, R. Moses Kimchi, Jacobus de Voragine,
Alanus, R. Moses, Aben Tafon, R. Mordechai, and Hierony-
mus 4 Sancta Fide. Finally, the Lord illuminated Hugo
Alverda, “ our excellent Chief, to commission his brethren
into the whole world,” for the annunciation of this “ godly
and wholesome philosophy.”

The genealogy being such—indiscriminately among
Jews and Christians—it will be understood that the Hidden
Temple had not only its treasures of oral tradition but lost
and unknown books, probably beyond computation. A
few are promised categorically “at the expiration of a
brief time,” among which I need mention only those
of King Solomon and the magical works of Apollonius

262

-- Page 293 --
Development of Rosicrucian Literature

of Tyana. In the presence of such an equipment the Order
can afford to be merry, and is so after a German manner,
when “inconsiderate and unskilled people” deny that it
can add to the general sum of knowledge, more especially
seeing that its members “can speak and write not only
all languages but also all dialects.” As regards complaints
respecting the silence of the Order, the pamphlet appeals
to its notorious cures of diseases “‘ without reward,” and
to the counsels on matters of government which it
has addressed to those who rule. We hear no longer about
false books on alchemy and lists which are going to be
published for the protection of sincere students, but much
on the age and importance of the metallic art, with hints
as to all that could be unfolded by those who write, were
they called so todo. There is also a synopsis of the virtues
possessed by “ our artificial gold.” In fine it is testified
that the legality or otherwise of “ our College ” does not
tolerate debate, the reason given being curious: “ For
we have had and may have still in our Fraternity, Popes,
Cardinals, Emperors, Kings, Bishops, Abbots, Prelates,
Earls and Lords ”’—a notable list truly, having regard to
the Reformation rant of Conressio FRaTERNITATIS.

In the year following, 1619, the same ‘“ unworthy
German notary” issued Fons Gratim, the Fountain or
Grace, being a brief declaration concerning the precise
time when those who were “accepted as Brethren of
the Holy and Blessed Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross”
should make a beginning in respect of their “redemption
and perfection,” or in simpler words, when Postulants
might look for reception. It sounds like a clear issue
and was written by “special command of the aforesaid
high Society.” ‘The colophon, however, quotes—perhaps
advisedly—the familiar text: ‘“‘ Blessed are those who
have not seen and have believed.” It calls upon those
“humble Brethren who are enrolled in our Society” to

263

-- Page 294 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

praise the Lord. Yet a year hence and they shall reach
their plenary salvation. The document is “ given at
. Aleppo”? on November 29, 1618, and the great day of
election is that date precisely in the following year. Then,
as it is certified, there will be sent to those who tarry
“one of our Society, videlicet, Elman Zarta, who will
assemble you and bring you to our dwelling, with very
great triumph and rejoicing, from this vale of woe.”
Whatsoever is said by this ambassador on “ our behalf”
shall be fulfilled truly, and that with faithful diligence.
Readers are referred for the rest to Maier’s THemis Aurga,
“wherein he made manifest that we belong in unbroken
succession to the medical faculty.” ! In fine the Selected
Brethren and Sons of Wise Humility must understand
that they are coming into a still Sabbath and the narrow
way to eternity.

So far as any records are concerned, it does not appear
that the “humble Brethren,” or Postulants at the gate of
the Temple, received the promised visit or entered within
the precincts; but as regards the alleged envoy it may
be mentioned that a tract or manifesto entitled Forrati-
TIUM SCIENTI#,? published in 1617, was signed by (1) Hugo
de Alverda the Phrisian, in the 576th year of his age; (2)
Francois de Bry, the Frenchman, in his 495th year ; and
Elman Zarta, or Zatta, the Arab, at the age of 463.'
The ForTatitrum was written under the pseudonym of
Rhodophilus Staurophorus, an alleged alternate, as we
have seen, to that of Irenzus.

1 Treneus affirms elsewhere that while the Rosicrucian habitation is
normally invisible, the compassion of the Order has caused it to be seen
frequently by the poor and sick.

® The Forrauitru affirmed that the glorious and enlightened Fraternity
have proffered the unerring art of all arts to worthy and virtuous persons
who study the sum of wisdom.

3 The signatures attached to Forraurrivm excited the ridicule of
Mundus in Grease ror THe Fatt, and it may be noted as a curious point
that he refers the tract itself to the authorship of “ Rosencreutz.”

264

-- Page 295 --
Development of Rosicrucian Literature

On April 3, 1619, Irenzus Agnostus put forward an
“indispensable advertisement to Novices,” * exhorting
them to persevere even to the end (1) in faith towards
God, (2) the love of others, (3) patience, and (4) in their
trust of the Order and its goodness. On August 16 he
produced a Rute or Lire? for those who had not yet
been incorporated by the Order, notwithstanding their
earnest desire for this privilege. The next and last item
which stands to the credit of Irenzus in this connection
—rightly or wrongly—is dated August 25 and is called
Eprtimia Frarernitatis R..C ..,3 being a final revelation,
discovery and apologia in respect of the Most Enlightened
Order of the R..C.., and of its sincere and truthful Con-
fession. It claimed to be written, printed and published
by the ordinance of the Society itself. So far as we have
proceeded, and whether writing, so to speak, at his own
instance or officially in reply to hostile critics, we are
acquainted with Irenzus only as a fervent champion of
the Order, in and out of season. He has seemed some-
times an admirer from a certain distance and sometimes
speaking from within. On the present occasion he is
vested with official authority, but the unaccountable fact
emerges that Eprrimia is against the Rosicrucian claims
and unfriendly to the persons of the Brethren. He informs
his peers and co-heirs, otherwise, “‘my Brethren of the
R..C..,” that he knows not how to regard them or what
manner of men they are. They have produced so far in
their writings only familiar things and things full of con-
tradictions. On the supposition, however, that they are
the keepers of a real knowledge which might redound to

1 Tuzsaurus Fives, das ist, ein nothwendiger Bericht und V. erwarnung an
die Novitios, etc. 1619, 5.1.

2 Recura Virm, das ist, eine Heylsame, Niitzliche und Notwendige
Erinnerung, etc. 1619, 5.1.

8 Eprrimia Frateaniratis R.".C,"., das ist, Endliche Offenbarung, oder
Entdeckung und Verthaydigung dess hochl. Ordens dess R..C.'.., etc. 1619, s..

265

-- Page 296 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

the benefit of mankind, they should come forth into the
open day and communicate it in public teaching, not in
anonymous pamphlets. ‘Then, warming as he proceeds,
there are the following more serious affirmations: (1)
That the Brethren are mere magicians, making false claims
on power; (2) That their wisdom is hollow pretence ;
(3) That he has visited many lands and has heard nothing
concerning them; (4) That in reality the Order was
founded by the Jesuits as part of their secret warfare
against the religion of reform. It follows (1) that its
members, as he says indeed categorically, are ignorant
persons and that when he terms them most enlightened
in his title he himself has lied ; (2) that he has not published
his pamphlet by their command; and (3) that if he has
failed to meet with them in his travels or even gain
tidings concerning them, he cannot belong to them as
he claims.

One would think that in the sense and reason of things,
even at that bewrayed period, it was impossible, without
preface or explanation, to take up suddenly a new position
like this. It must be remembered that the period elapsing
between the unconditional defence of Recuta Vir# and the
radical hostility of Epitimia is the space between August
16 and August 25 of the same year. There is neither
situation to save nor axe to grind so far as I am concerned,
but as a matter of logic and likelihood my inference is
that Ireneus Agnostus did not write Eprtimia, the fact
notwithstanding that this pseudonym appears on its title-
page. [t is more likely to have been the work of Menapius,
to whom also it has been attributed, and in this connection

1 There is, of course, a strong possibility that some Rosicrucian texts
were like some texts of alchemy, namely, speculations of unprincipled book-
sellers, produced to their order for the exploitation of a public demand.
And yet if Eprrmmra was ascribed falsely, why did not Irenzus repudiate it
in yet one other pamphlet? The problem baffles ingenuity.

266

-- Page 297 --
Development of Rosicrucian Literature

it may be noted that at the end of Liser T’, or bound up
therewith in that copy which came into the hands of
Kloss, there is a missive or SenpscHREIBEN of Menapius in
which he pretends that the author of Fama rr Conressio
and also Irenzus Agnostus had foisted a hoax on the public.’
It is added that a certain J. Procopius bore similar testimony
in the same place, but I have not met with him among
the numerous interlocutores of the long debate.

It remains to say that according to Sédir the identity
of Irenzus has never transpired, though he is able to tell
us (1) that he was Chancellor of Westphalia; (2) that he
was the best Catholic theologian of his time ; (3) that he
debated incognito at Frankfurt with Jean de Martoff and
others, presumably Lutherans ; (4) that he conferred with
Henry IV of France in 1606 “on the best manner of
terminating the war”; and (5) that he discharged public
functions at Lubeck, Hamburg, Luneville and elsewhere.
On the other hand, Kloss says, but I know not on what
authority, that Ireneus was Gotthardus Arthusius of
Dantzic, joint rector of the Gymnasium at Frankfurt-on-the-
Main, in which case we have met with him already as
a Candidate for admission into the Rosicrucian Order so
early as 1614. ‘There is nothing attaching to the question of

1 He claimed also that he was perfectly well acquainted with the author
of the Fama and knew better than anyone what to think on the reality of
the R..C... The letter cited by Kloss is by Gometz Menapius, supposed
to be a variant pseudonym of F.G.M. We may compare Spuynx Rosacza,
Frankfurt, 1618, which—according to Kloss—was written by C. Nigrinus,
a theologian and friend of the Muses. It claims to be an “ inoffensive
hypothesis ” concerning the origin of the “illustrious Order ” as well as of
the Fama and Conressto. As regards the legend of Christian Rosy Cross and
the Brethren whom he incorporated, the author had “ certain originals ” in
his mind. It states further that C...R..C.*. was an adventurer known as
Andreas von Carolstadt. Various names are assigned to the other seven
originals, one of whom was Zwinglius. This tract has been attributed also
to Florentinus de Valentia, with whom I have dealt as an early official
apologist. Nigrinus has been mentioned in a previous note concerning the
alleged Calvinism of the Order.

267

-- Page 298 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
identity for any purpose of my own, but it may serve to
introduce a further point, on which also opinion is divided.
According to Biihle and others, Ireneus was a hostile
satirist who posed as champion of the Order with his
“ tongue in his cheek,” in which case it might be presumed
that he varied the farce by subsequently turning against
it. Nicolai takes the opposite view, regarding him as a
serious defender and expositor; but the German book-
seller of the Illuminati period was probably unacquainted
with Epitim1a, while he mistook Fons Gratim for a work
of Robert Fludd. This notwithstanding, I conclude that
Nicolai was probably in the right: it is quite impossible
to read Crypeum Veritatis or Fons Grati&, not to speak
of other texts, and suppose that they were the work of
a concealed enemy or of a farceur producing dull hoaxes
by the score for the confusion of German occult minds.
The notion is really a derivative of the Bihle and Johann
Georg Walch hypothesis, which postulates Andree and
thirty so-called theosophists conspiring together—as we
have seen—to fill the press with lies. My opinion of
German theosophy in the first decades of the seventeenth
century is my opinion of the Lutheran strife of sects, but
it will be remembered that I have rejected this unworthy
view. Its second derivative proposes, for the ease of the
creaking hypothesis, to identify apparently independent
Rosicrucian apologists, as Irenzus and Schweighardt, but
no evidence is produced. In its absence I conclude on
grounds of simplicity that the Order had apologists and
critics, who stand as such at their value in the usual way,
and that it must be left an open question whether those
on the affirmative side and Menapius on the side of denial,
who claimed to be members, told the truth or not.
There is no means of knowing. On the assumption of their
good faith it must be said that the Rosy Cross of 1614-20
could have been hardly in a position to communicate

268

-- Page 299 --
Development of Rosicrucian Literature
anything that justified its claims, if the records of apologists
and defendants offer—as I think they do—some criterion
for judgment.

The year 1620 saw two further publications, a note on
which may close the present chapter. The first is SpecuLUM
Ampitionis! by Johann Hintnem, described as Hisroricus
Trererensis. It indicates that onward from the world’s
beginning the Devil has made use of ambition to engender
idolatry, heresy, factions, sects, but especially to spread
new Orders, an example of which is the new Fraternity
R..C... The charge against this is a further ringing of
changes on the vexed question of religion: its principles
are contrary to those of Luther, though it has adopted
his seal, and for this reason no one should join it. The
circulation of apocryphal manuscripts is also laid at its
door, while generally as regards its claims, and notwithstand-
ing its proud titles, the Order is reminded that the seven
wonders of the world, the glories of Greece and Rome,
and all that is serviceable to life, owed nothing to the Rosy
Cross. The second tract is perhaps most curious of all,
for it is entitled the WorxsnHop oF THE SISTERS OF THE
Rosy Cross,? containing a discovery of its nature and what
can be found for religion and science therein. It claims
to be printed at Parthenopolis and to be written by a
Franco-German Famagusta. It may have been about as
serious at its period as Leo Taxil’s Y-a-r-11 pes Femmes
DANS LA Francmaconneriz, and yet the suggestion is
notable, for we shall come later on to consider the important
question of Woman and the Rosy Cross.

If there is one thing which can be said to emerge clearly
from all the chaos of debate, it is that J. V. Andree knew

1 SpecuLum Amprrionis, das ist, Spiegel des Bhrgettues ... Durch Jou.
Hintnem Trerurensem Historicum. 1620, sine loco.

® FRAWEN-ZIMMER DER SCHWESTERN DES ROSINFARBEN (sic) Creurzes . .,
Durch FamaucustaM FRranco-ALEMANNICAM. 1620.

269

-- Page 300 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
what he was saying when he spoke in Myruotocia Curist-
1anA Of “a complete change of actors.” Whatsoever
personalities were veiled by Fama and Conrzssio they are
represented no longer in the subsequent memorials which
claim to speak officially. I do not believe that the two
original manifestoes were the work of one person, but I
think that they belong to each other. The third, or
Nuptt# Cuymica#, represents the intervention of Andrez,
but it stands outside the general controversial region.
The Ecuo Frarernitatis manifests a new spirit and a
new claim on the past, but it is not otherwise militantly
at issue with the set of notions represented by the original
sources. These are stultified, as I have said, by Julianus de
Campis, and they might have been withdrawn from
circulation when the procession of apologists began to
fill the stage. As to what was transpiring in secret it is
impossible to have any but the most tentative hypothesis
and every speculation is likely to be out of court. ‘The
“‘ change of actors’? may signify groups which had agreed
independently to adopt the style and title of Rosicrucians
for their several purposes, whatever they happened to be,
and then a time came when their representatives fell foul
of each other. Meanwhile it is colourably possible that
the old group went on but was found on the stage no longer,
or in other words that they gave no sign in pamphlets.
270

-- Page 301 --
CHAPTER X
ENGLISH ROSICRUCIANISM
Tue Kentish village of Bearsted } lies at a distance of almost
three miles eastward from the county town of Maidstone,
just off the main road in a peaceful, pleasant vale, ringed
by hills in the distance. It is a sweet and scented place,
green with a hundred gardens of hops, an illustration of
perfect retirement, but marked otherwise by no special
individuality. The church above the village, on the
descent from the main road, belongs to several periods,
having even Norman vestiges, and is fair to look at, above
all on the ivied side. It is dedicated to the Holy Cross,
the later architectural style being mainly perpendicular—
for example, the picturesque tower and the eastern window.
There is an aisle on the north and a chantry of the four-
teenth century. On the southern side of the chancel
a Minute organ has been placed within comparatively
recent times. The stained glass window of the chancel
depicts somewhat vividly the Descent from the Cross,
and there are panelled figures, on the walls, of apostles
and holy women. On the floors and walls of the aisle are
many memorials of the Cage family, numbers of whom are
interred beneath their tablets. With these I have no con-
cern; but on the eastern wall of the aisle there is an
elaborate commemoration which he of whom I must
speak—a most illustrious “philosopher by fire ”—erected
1 Otherwise Bearstead and Bersted.
271

-- Page 302 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
to the memory of his mother.1 Besides the armorial
bearings at the top of this tablet there is a curious winged
skull, the wings being painted blue, while the skull is an
earth-brown. Some interest attaches to the memorial,
more especially because the inscription happens to have
been the work of the son. Far more important, however,
is a cross on the floor of the chancel hard by the altar-
steps and bearing the following legend :

Sn Pesu gut mibt omnta

tn bifa morte resurgam.

Under this stone restetb the body of Robert Fudd,
Doctor of Pbisicke, who changed this transitory life
for an immortall the viii day of September A® MRI
MDCXEXVS5, being WESFF years of age: whose
Monument ts erected in this chancel according to the
forme by bim prescribed.

1 The inscription is as follows :—

Wors ei quac bene vitit Lucrum.,

Elizabeth Andros being of the Ancient Familie of the Andros
of Tavnton in Somerset Sbire was ye first wit unto Sit Thos Fludd
of Millgate Rnight: By whom be bad divers sonns and davgbters
whose names are expressed on bis Monument. What ber
matchless $ndustric in fbousewifry was, and bow amply she
expressed herself in tbe entertainment of ber friends and in
what lavdable manner ber bospitalityp was extended towards pe
poore we need not to expresse in writing, secing that pe essentiall
characters thereof are engraven even to this very day in the bearts
ot sucb as are yet living who were conversant witb bet in ber lit
time: sbe changed this mortal [fife for an immortal the 25tb dap
of January, 1591.

“<fAccept, © blessed soul, as sacrifice,
A filial signal of obedfence,
Fnd let this marble memorte suffice,
Altbo’ but in a part of recompense,
To manifest the lopal duty of pour sonne,
Betore bis toilsome pilgrimage of life be done.’

The son erected also a monument to the memory of his father, Sir

Thomas Fludd, but the exceedingly long inscription is very much defaced.
272

-- Page 304 --
English Rosicrucianism

Somewhere about the year 1855 this monument was
unfortunately removed from the chancel to the vestry
under the tower. It is in marble and includes a bust of
Robert Fludd, with the right arm and hand resting upon
an open book. The inscription in this case is as follows :

Sacred to the Memory

of the $llustrious Pbysician and Man Robert Fludd,
alias De #Fluctibus, Doctor of botb Faculties, who
after some years of travelling beyond seas, under=
taken successfully for the improvement of bis mind, was
at lengtb restored to bis Fatberland and was not
undeservedly received into the Society of the Dondon
College of Pbysicians. ‘tbe ercbanged lite for deatb
peacefully on the 8tb day of the month of September
AS DOS MDCEFEVSS, in the 63rd year of bis age.

spo costly perfumes from thie urn ascend ;

Gn gorgeous tomb thine ashes do not lie ;

by mortal part alone to earch we give;

Che records of thy mind can never die:

For he who writes like thee—though veat—

Cvects a tomb that laste for ape.

Thomas Fudd of Gore Court, Otbam, in ‘ent,
Esquire, erected this Monument to the bappy Memory
of bis most dear Uncle on the 10th day of the montb
of August, MMDCCEFEVZSS.2
It has been reconstructed by Dr. Craven and will be found in the fourth
chapter of his work, already cited. We learn from this source that Robert
was the fifth of six sons and that two daughters were also born to his parents.
Thomas Fludd came of a Shropshire family and was knighted by Queen
Elizabeth for his military services.

1 Sacrum Memorie Claris: Doctissg: viri Rosertt Frupp, alias de
Fluctibus, utriusg: Medicine Doctoris, qui post aliquot annorum perigri-
nationem quam ad recipiendum ingenit cultum in transmarinos regiones feliciter
susceperat, patriae tandem restitutus et in celeberrimi Collegii Medicorum

T 273

-- Page 305 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

The entire monument is enclosed by an arch ; there are
armorial bearings behind the head of the bust; and on
each side there were originally four books arranged one
above the other. Two only remain and are inscribed
respectively Mysterium Cabalisticum and Philosophia Sacra.

A rugged and precipitous footpath brings the traveller
—proceeding south-east from the church—once more to
a main road and opposite the lodge-gate of Milgate House,
in which Robert Fludd was born.t_ The manorial residence
itself is in one of the best manners of the country-seat of its
period. At the time of my visit—now twenty-five years
ago—the lodge was empty and open-windowed; the
bosky, winding drive which led from gate to manor was
somewhat wild and weedy ; amidst ferns on the left, with
an occasional glimpse of deer, was a cluster of tiny cottages,
all untenanted ; and the house itself was empty. For the
Londinensis Soctetatem non immerito electus vitam morte placide commutavit
vit die mensis vibris, Ao Dnt MDCXXXVIT etatis sue LXIII,.

Magnificis hac non sub odoribus urna vaporat
Crypta tegit cineres nec speciosa tuos
Quod mortale minus tibt te committimus unum
Ingenit vivent hic monumenta tui,
Nam tibi qut similis seribit, mortturque, sepulchrum
Pro tota aternum posteritate factt.
Hac monumentum Tuomas Fiupp, Gore Courte, in Otham, Apud Cantianos
Armiger in falicissimam charissimi Patrui sui memoriam erexit, die X
mensis Augustt MDCXX XVIII.

The rendering of the Latin verses given in the text above is that which
appears in Archdeacon Craven’s Docror Rosert Fiupp, THE ENnGuisH
RosicRuciaNn.

1 Speaking of its proximity to the church, Archdeacon Craven says:
“Not far off stands the more modern house of Milgate” ; i.e., modern in
respect of the church. Presumably on this basis Dr. Westcott says that
“the site of the house where Robert Fludd was born is now occupied by a
more recent building.” See Transactions of the Metropolitan College,
1907, p. 47. According to Hasted—Husrory or Kent, II, 486, 487—Sir
Thomas Fludd improved and augmented it. Whether it was ever entirely
rebuilt I have not been able to ascertain. It is not as it stands exactly an
edifice of the sixteenth century, but when I went over it many years ago,
T have a pious hope that it was at least in parts the house in which Fludd
was born and not something altogether different erected on the same site.

274

-- Page 306 --
English Rosiwcrucianism

first time on record, whether for Kentish histories—like that
of monumental Hasted—or for still more archaic “ Visita-
tions,” the house was explored, as I need not tell, even from
roof to basement. As one who goes back through the
centuries to a desired place and time, I saw the strange
mythological paintings which adorn the fine staircase, trod
the echoing floor of the library and admired its beautiful
oak panelling, paused a little before the spacious chimney-
corner of the great kitchen, passed upstairs to the quaint
and not too roomy drawing-room, perchance a retreat
for ladies of quality in the reign of James I, and traversed
the innumerable bedrooms, in one of which it might
be dreamed that Fludd was born. From almost every
window there are charming views of a well-kept English
lawn and English woodland vistas. The whole impression
was delightful, though again there was nothing that
could be called especially distinctive, and Milgate House,
like Bearsted Church, may be seen in one of its varieties
in many a shire and county, provided that manor or
church be “ four miles from any town.”?

1 On September 14, 1907, the Masonic Rosicrucians of the London
Metropolitan College determined to visit Bearsted and the tomb of Robert
Fludd. The date contained a sacrament, for it was the Festival of the Holy
Cross or, more correctly, that of its Exaltation, a double of the first class in
the Calendar of the Latin Rite. Presumably it connoted the Rosy Cross in
the mind of Masonic Rosicrucians, who do not seem to have been aware that
the church—as I have said in the text—was dedicated to the Holy Cross.
But it was also a few days after the 270th anniversary of Fludd’s death, and
their object was to place “a memorial wreath on his monument.” They
termed the exeursion a pilgrimage, but it was performed by train. They
were aware in their zeal that the excellent Hargrave Jennings had made
such a journey previously, or at least dreamed that he did. His lucubration
on the subject in Te Rostcrucrans is quoted in a memorial of the later
adventure in the Transactions of the Metropolitan College for the year
in question. The Supreme Magus was moved so much beyond his wont
by the occasion and its circumstances that he delivered no less than two
Orations, one before the monument beneath the tower and one subsequently
at the Ancient Bell Hotel, Maidstone, where the Rosicrucians took their tea.
In the earlier discourse Dr. Westcott states that Fludd “ may be well called

275

-- Page 307 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

There is full opportunity for the ordinary literate reader
to make acquaintance at this day—at least in a preliminary
sense—with Robert Fludd of Bearsted, reputed Rosicrucian
and memorable occult philosopher. Ifa student of animal
magnetism, one may meet with his name and a summary
account concerning him in Joseph Ennemoser’s attempt
the first and chief of English Rosicrucians,” ignoring the preliminary and
vital question whether in the absence of all direct evidence it is legitimate to
term him a Rosicrucian at all—except by mental dedication. We can say
only that he was the first English expositor and defender of Rosicrucian
claims and principles, as they were put forth in Germany. Westcott speaks
further of Fludd’s “intimate connection with the great German Rosi-
crucian Magus Michael Maier, whom he greatly admired and respected ”
and by whom he was led “ to enter with the greatest ardour into Rosicrucian
studies.” To these positives and superlatives I will add merely that the
statement is /udibrium magnum. There is no evidence of intimate acquaint-
ance between Fludd and Maier ; there is so little evidence of admiration and
respect that Maier seems mentioned nowhere in Fludd’s writings. The story
that they met in England is a precarious inference from the fact that Maier
came over, by his own testimony, to England and afterwards is said to have
published a work of Fludd’s in Germany. That Maier was a Rosicrucian
Magus there is no scrap of direct evidence to shew : such a denomination ap-
pears—as I believe—for the first time in a work of Magister Pianco belonging
to the year 1782. Having testified thus in the Church the Supreme Magus
proceeded to testify in the hostelry, where he affirmed that Fludd during his
foreign travels “ became acquainted with the Rosicrucian Fraternity and ’—
it being desirable apparently to accentuate the previous point— made a
notable friend of the famous Magus and adept Michael Maier.” It will be
seen that the latter has taken another grade in the occult hierarchy. But
Fludd, by his own shewing, returned to England in or about 1604, at which
date neither Westcott nor another can bring forward any proof that the
Fraternity was in existence, except possibly in the mind of Simon Studion,
while as regards Maier he had published nothing and was utterly unknown.
Elsewhere and long previously the “ Supreme Magus” affirmed that Fludd
was initiated abroad. See Ars Quatuor Coronarorum, Vol. VII, p. 41.
The story of his initiation is old—much older than the Metropolitan Chapter
and allits lights of learning. Reghellini, in the year 1833, offers the following
statements: (1) That the R..R..0f..0%.". appeared in England; (2)
that Robert Fludd wrote a book in defence of the Rosicrucian Brethren ;
(3) that he was initiated and had a large number of disciples ; (4) that he
applied the principles of the Gnostics to physics; and (5) that, as a sequel
of his system there followed that great revolution which came about in
English science.—La Magonnerig, etc., already cited. But in the last
clause Reghellini appears to confuse Fludd with Bacon.

276

-- Page 308 --
English Rosicructanism

to explain the whole history of magic by means of the force
which Mesmer found or recovered at the close of the
eighteenth century. If drawn alternatively to investigate
the origins of the Masonic Fraternity, he will have seen
certain dubious and somewhat sensational references to
Fludd in that fantastic exposition which Thomas de
Quincey adapted from the German Biihle, under the
title of Rostcrucians AND Freemasons. But if his interest
be rather towards the mysterious and elusive Brotherhood
which united the Rose and Cross in a single symbol, he may
have met with Fludd’s literary and philosophical portrait
at much greater length in one of my early studies of this
subject,? or with the connection between Fludd and alchemy
in my Lives of Alchemystical Philosophers and elsewhere.
Finally, he may have had recourse to the excellent mono-
graph on Docror Roserr Fiupp by Archdeacon Craven,
of whose great care and sympathy it is good to offer this
brief word in recognition.

I have mentioned here the most available sources of
information in what is practically a chronological order,
but those who would still pursue the subject must have
recourse to the philosopher’s chief writings, which are buried
—with one exception—in Latin of the seventeenth century
and are mostly books in folio. They perplexed the scholars
of their own period and they perplexed rare readers in
later generations, till it seemed to be understood that the
author might be named indeed but not consulted. Yet
a good deal of curious lore has accreted about his memory,
and he stands now somewhat as a figure in philosophical
romance. Mr. Craven has dealt as he could with Fludd’s
involved system and has furnished most material help,
taking the texts successively. The works treat of life,

1 See History or Macic, 2 vols., in Bohn’s translation.

? Reax History oF THe Rosicrucians, 1887, cap. XI.

® Published in 1888. See p. 16, sv. Michael Maier.
277

-- Page 309 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

death and resurrection; the macrocosmos, or greater
world ; the world in little, or the microcosm ; Mosaical
cosmogony ; the universal medicine ; above all the claims
put forward by the Rosicrucian Brotherhood and the
recognition due to these. According to his own description
—as we shall see shortly—he was a seeker through all and
in all for “ the unknown basis of true philosophy and the
supreme secret” of healing. At the beginning of the
seventeenth century, as it did for some time afterwards, this
quest signified a Kabalistical interpretation of the universe
and the pursuit of alchemy. ‘The theosophical tradition of
Israel—represented by the word Kabalism—was a great
intellectual puzzle and wonder of that time, and Fludd was
one of its students, so far at least as its literature had passed
into the Latin tongue. William Postel had translated
Tue Boox or Formarion.? Riccius, Reuchlin and Arch-
angelus de Burgo Nuovo had brought back glad tidings
from Hebrew and Aramaic texts.2 Portent and comet
of a season, Picus de Mirandula had flashed much earlier
across the horizon of Europe and passed too soon; but he
had left his Tueszs Cappauistic® and the amazing report
of Esdras manuscripts, which embodied all mysteries of
Israel from the days of the patriarch Abraham.? Like
all those who preceded him, Fludd construed the tradition
in the light of Christian revelation. As to the alchemists
whom he followed, “ their voices were in all men’s ears.”
Both subjects belonged to the romantic mind of the period,

1 Gulielmus Postellus: Abrahami Patriarche Lrazr Jzstran. Paristis,
OF There was also Petrus Galatinus: De Arcanis CaTHoLice® VERITATIS,
1602, being twelve books in folio of Dialogues between himself and Reuchlia.
It is followed by Joannes Reuchlinus : Dz Arre Casaxistica, Libri Tres.

3 The texts which came actually into his hands were those comprised in
the Sepuer Ha Zouar. They are described briefly by Jacques Gaffarel in
Codicum Cabbalisticorum Manuscriptorum quibus est usus Foannes Picus Comes
Mirandulanus Inpex. Parisiis, 1651.

278

-- Page 310 --
English Rosicrucianism

and—so far as England was concerned in the days of James
[—it is this romance which has taken name and shape
about Fludd. It was not a time of tolerance, as people may
know if they read or remember history ; but the Reforma-
tion meant qualified liberation here and in Germany.
The horizon was extending everywhere; the study of
different philosophies, of theosophical systems more than
these, and above all of Nature, working in her secret
laboratories, offered an escape from the narrow measures
of reform in official doctrine and practice, without rejecting
the reform and without ceasing to be “a true Protestant
in the best sense of the Church of England’? or of
Luther.

It was further a period of great claims in the so-called
occult world, and not long after Robert Fludd “ was at
length returned to his Fatherland,” after those “ years of
travelling beyond seas” mentioned on his monument at
Bearsted, the star of Rosicrucianism rose over the German
world. His six years’ tour had included Germany as well
as France, Spain and Italy, and one of his biographers
suggests that during its course he imbibed that taste for
Rosicrucian philosophy by which his after life and all his
writings are coloured.? 1 am perhaps a little surprised that
the makers of imaginative history have not found material
more to their purpose in this travelling. We have seen that
speculation adorned in pontificals of certitude supposes
a first meeting with Maier the alchemist abroad, thus
beginning an acquaintance which was to be renewed and
improved in England at a later date. But what was to
prevent Fludd from seeing and even instructing the famous
Johannes Valentinus Andrex, then a precocious boy in his
’teens? And if indeed the Order of the Rosy Cross lies hidden
as to its origin behind the year 1614, should it not be possible

1 Tt is the quaint testimony of Thomas Vaughan concerning himself.

2 See Munk’s Rout or THe Rovat Cotrce or Puysicians, Vol. I, p. 150.

279

-- Page 311 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

for one who carried all its seals of dedication to have come
across Simon Studion and even to have inspected NAOMETRIA
on the eve of his return to England? The opportunity
would appear to have been missed because, according to all
use and wont, the occult fiction must be not alone contrary
to fact but against all colour of reason and all traceable
likelihood.t

Fludd returned from abroad in or about 1604 to graduate
in medicine at Oxford on May 16, 1605? and after several
difficulties—owing to his opinions and apparently his
personal manners—he was admitted a Fellow of the College
of Physicians on September 20, 1609.3 It was not till
1616, being forty-two years old, that he first appeared in
print, when he wrote in defence of the early Rosicrucian
pamphlets and the claims embodied thereby. He was
drawn to them in three ways: (1) By an innate love of
the marvellous, accompanied by credulity which was extra-
ordinary even for his period and for the particular bent
of his interests; (2) by the fact that the Rosicrucians
purported to be an association of masters keeping guard
over those very possessions to which Fludd himself aspired—
the basis of philosophy and the supreme secret of medicine ;
and (3) by the fact that he may have been acquainted
--we have seen that this is a thorny question—with
one of identical dedications, who became himself a
German exponent of the Order and whom there is
considerable reason for connecting later on with the
society at its headquarters, assuming its corporate exist-
ence at that period—I mean, the alchemist Michael
Maier. The publication to which I have alluded is called
A Comrenpiovus Apotocy for the Fraternity of the Rosy
Cross, pelted with the Mire of Suspicion and Infamy, but

+ Witness occult reveries on the Bacon-Shakespeare question and
generally on Rosicrucian history and doctrine.

2 Munk, op. cit., p. 150. § [bid., pp. 150-3.

280

-- Page 312 --
English Rosicructanism

now cleansed and purged as by the Waters of Truth. Though
his name appears on the title, it has been stated that this
minute tract was not the work of Fludd, on the authority
of what evidence I have never been able to ascertain. ‘The
point is not unimportant, for it is not only the first work
ever penned in England on the Order of the Rosy Cross,
but if correctly attributed, it follows that Robert Fludd
preceded Michael Maier in that defence and exposition of
the Fraternity which engrossed the zeal of both. It is
possible fortunately to determine the question by recourse
to a manuscript in the Library of the British Museum. It
is a thin quarto volume in the handwriting of the period,
exceedingly clear and beautiful, but unfortunately re-
garded as the copy of a destroyed original, in which
case there is no known autograph of Fludd now in existence.
It is entitled: A SHorr Decraration, addressed to the
Most Serene and Potent Prince and Lord, the Lord Jams,
King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, and Defender of
the Faith: Wherein is made clear the true purpose of a
certain published Work on the part of the Author himself, to
wit, Rosert Fiupp, Esquire and Doctor of Medicine, unto
the King’s Majesty.» The published work referred to is
called Tracratus meus Apouoceticus. The curiosity and
probably the suspicion of the royal mind had been excited
by the defence of an occult Order on the part of his

1 Apotocia CompenprariA Fraternitatem ve Rosra Cruce Suspiciont.
et infamia maculis aspersam, veritatis quast Fluctibus abluens et abstergens ;
ductore R. de Fluctibus, M.D., Lond. Leyde apud Godefridum Bassons
ore But see later on respecting Tracratus Arotoceticus, which appeared

2 Dectanatto Brevis, Serenissimo et Potentissimo Principi ac Domino,
Domino Jacoso, Magne Britannia, Francie et Hybernia Regi, Fideique
Defensori dedicata, in qua sincera operis cujusdam publicati intentio Majestati
tpstus Regia luculenter per ipsum auctorem RoBertum Friup, Armigerum et in
Medicina Doctorem Regie Majestati subditissimum explicatur.

3A second and more extended tract of Fludd’s, described subsequently,
It embodied the first pamphlet, as we shall see.

281

-- Page 313 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
Kentish subject. He may have doubted the Rosicrucians
because rumours of witchcraft would be abroad already
concerning them, while we know that he believed in
witchcraft and feared it. By consequence, he would also
be doubting Fludd, who followed strange ways in medicine
and whose ways may not have been unknown. It would
appear that the SHorr Dectaration was penned in obedi-
ence to the royal demand, not perhaps without some
trepidation on the part of the “ philosopher by fire.”
Be this as it may, the opportunity was favourable for
compliment, and though Fludd’s explanation is manly and
honest enough, it is sweetened at the beginning by just
that measure of adulation which was to be expected under
the circumstances. This finished, he proceeds to clear his
treatise from any suspicion of heresy or desire to make
innovations in religion, explaining that the reformed faith
—‘‘as in use amongst us in England ”--was infused into
him almost with his mother’s milk and had been adhered to
faithfully ever since. Then next on the question of
immorality, he affirms “in the sight of God and of your
Majesty ” that he had lived always as virgo immaculata.’
With regard to the Rosicrucians, that school of philosophers
is acknowledged by the Germans—whether Papists or
Lutherans—to have embraced most firmly the religion of
Calvin, in support of which statement Fludd cites a letter
received by him from a friend at Frankfurt, named Justus
Helt, and refers afterwards to the Conression issued by the
Fraternity, “ wherein it is most openly declared that they
belong to the reformed religion.” That which attracted
Fludd towards the Rosicrucians he admits to be their revela-

1 We know him otherwise as a high-minded Christian gentleman who—
for reasons which do not transpire—never entered into the bonds of wedlock.
Was it because in undertaking to defend the Rosicrucians he modelled
himself on the rule of the first members, who are described in the Fama as
“all bachelors and of vowed virginity”? Was it because he was incorporated
and living under their rule ?

“82

-- Page 314 --
English Rosicrucitanism

tion! of a hitherto unknown basis of true philosophy and of
that supreme secret of medicine to which I have referred
already. On these points he submits certain propositions
for the royal assent, and proceeds to develop various con-
siderations concerning them, after which there are matters
connected with the dedication to the King of his forth-
coming work on the Macrocos ; but this is outside our
inquiry.” The manuscript ends with citations of commen-
datory letters received by the author from various foreigners
of philosophical or other eminence, including the before-
mentioned Justus Helt, Jean Balthasar and others. There
is a final commendation of his cause to the justice and
wisdom of his king.

While this very curious document, so long unaccountably
passed over, establishes the authorship of the TRactatus
Apotoceticus and exhibits the alleged religious tenets of
original Rosicrucianism to some extent in a new light,
there is nothing which predisposes a critical reader to
include Robert Fludd in a list of the Society’s initiates, for
~—taken by itself—the reference to a new basis of philosophy
on which I have annotated is wholly inadequate as evidence.
It may be warrantable to urge that he would have concealed
the fact of his membership from the curiosity of a
suspicious king, but this argument scarcely concerns
our inquiry, which is a quest after information. For its
absence there may be good reason, but the information is
not there.

1 The fact of such a basis is affirmed but cannot be said to be revealed by
Rosicrucian early literature. If Fludd spoke from within the circle we
should understand his statement better.

2 The reference is to Urrrusque Cosm1 Maysoris sctnicer er Minors
Metapbhysica, Physica atque Technica. In duo volumina secundum Cosmi
adifferentiam divisa. The first tract of the first volume appeared at Oppen-
heim in 1617, the dedication in question being preceded by a dedication to
God. The second tract was published in 1618. Vol. II began publication
in 1619, was continued in 1621, but never completed.

283

-- Page 315 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

It will be noted that the ArotociaA ComprENpDIARIA
appeared at Leyden in 1616, but the SHorr DectaraTion
refers to a Tracrarus Apotoceticus, which belongs to the
following year and had the same place of publication. I
have dealt with them so far as if they constituted a single
tract and this is essentially correct, the first having been
reprinted in the second as a Proemium thereunto. It was
therefore no more than an avant-courier or advertisement
of the more extended work which followed it. In both
there is a memorable epilogue addressed to the Brethren,?
wishing them salvation in Jesus Christ, whom they worship
sincerely and purely. For the errors which may be found
in his treatise the author craves forgiveness, saying that he
is but a rude philosopher and an unworthy publisher of
their praise. As regards his own personality, he is one of a
certain nobility—in respect of his nation, birth, status
and earthly name. His bride is the desire of wisdom ;_ his
children are those fruits which are thence begotten ; his
body is accounted as a prison ; for him the pleasures of the
world are vain and deadly to the mind. He desires to be
a glass unto himself, wherein he may contemplate what
he is. He describes how in mind and in body he has
traversed the chief countries of Europe, dared the depths
and tempests of the sea, withstood the toils of mountains,
the slippery descents of valleys, rude and savage shores,
hostile cities, the pride, ambition, avarice, deceit, faith-
lessness, ignorance and indolence of men; but he has

1 Tracrarus APoLoGETicus, integritatem SocieTatis DE Rosza CRuce
defendens. In qua probatur contra D. Lisavii et aliorum ejusdem faring
calumnias, quod admirabilia nobis a Fratrrnirate R.'.C.". oblata, sine
improba Magia impostura aut Diaboli prestigtis et illusionibus praestart
possint. Authore R. ve Fuuctisus Ancio, M.D. L. Lugduni Batavorum apud
Gopverripum Basson. Anno Domini 1617. Dr. Westcott calls the minute
Arorocia Comprnpraria a “ volume ” and says that it was republished in
1617 under the new title—a very misleading reference from a bibliographical
point of view. ‘TRaNsAcTIONS, 1907, p, 45.

2 The Epilogue of the first work is amplified slightly in the second.

284

-- Page 316 --
English Rosicructanism

discovered nowhere anyone who has attained to the height
of felicity or has come truly to know himself. Vanity of
vanities is to be found everywhere, and all things are as
vanity and wretchedness. Finally, he prays and beseeches
the Brothers of the Rosy Cross—by their faith and by the
ignorance of the age in true and pure philosophy—to be
with him and to protect him, to be mindful of him and of
their promises.

What those promises were may be determined by a
simple reference to the text of the Fama FRaTERNITATIS :
(1) That those who communicate their minds by print or
otherwise shall hear from the Order, by word of mouth or
in writing, and (z) that whosoever has affection thereunto
shall benefit “in goods, body and soul.” ‘These assurances
are checked in the Conressio by two qualifying affirmations:
(1) That “ we shall never be manifested unto any man unless
God should favour it ” and (z) that he “ who thinks to be
partaker of our riches against the will of God. . . shall
sooner lose his life in seeking than attain happiness by
finding us.” Alternatively, the promises of which Fludd
asks the Order to be mindful may be of a more intimate
kind and connote things personal to himself. While this
is pure speculation, it may not be without a reason that the
Epilogue of Apotocia ComPENpiariA says simply: Valete
nostrique memores estote, which carries no implication and is
little more than a courtesy of diction in drawing an
address to its conclusion ; but the enlarged Epilogue to the
Tracratus Apotoceticus says: Valete, Fratres suavissimt,
in illo tpso quem syncere colimus. Valete, inquam, iterumque
valete, et mihi (per vestrem fidem, perque bujus seculi in
Philosophia vera et pura ignorantiam vos oro atque obtestor)
favete, adeste: meique et promissorum vestrorum memores
estote. ‘Che extension is significant, and though it is not
strengthened by the context as quoted, it seems to me—
under all necessary reserves—that it could have been

285

-- Page 317 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
addressed by the novice of a Secret Order to Superiors
by whom he had been admitted.?

The Tractratus ApoLoceticus is not otherwise a work
which brings any especial conviction, save only on its
writer’s sincerity.2. The story of Christian Rosy Cross is
affirmed to be important for its traditional value and very
high from the ethical standpoint, but the tract is in
particular a defence of the Order as an advocate of general
reform—reform in Natural Philosophy, nothing short of
revolution in Medicine, and a radical change in all that
concerns Alchemy. Now, the quality of championship
must be judged in respect of Natural Philosophy by Fludd’s
militant hostility to experimental methods, his appeal from
particulars to universals and his insistence on the secret
wisdom which unveils Nature and draws from the Fountain
of Life. So also in respect of Medicine, for him it is in a
state of widowhood, apart from the Universal Medicine
which is like a crown of all art in healing. As regards
Alchemy, a different note is sounded when it is affirmed to
be enveloped in a maze of processes, buried under a cloud
of symbols and lost utterly amidst a great multitude of
arbitrary and fictitious terms. Hereof are the impediments
of science, which must be taken out of its way. The
remedy in respect of Natural Philosophy is by recourse to
the ancient philosophers and by decoding their occult
meanings, holding fast—for example—to the doctrine of
actives and passives and contemplating the wisdom of

1 So expressed and so guarded, my suggestion is to be distinguished from
the speculations expressed in terms of certitude which characterise manu-
facturers of dream like Dr. Wynn Westcott, who, without a particle of evi-
dence to justify, affirms (1) that Maier visited Fludd in London and (2) that
“the result of his visit was, we know, the publication of his ’—meaning
Fludd’s—* Apotocia, written in Latin and published in Leyden in 1616.”
See Ars Quatuor Coronarorum, Vol. VIII.

* Mr. Wigston thinks that it gives evidence of a reconstruction or
remodelling of the Rosy Cross in England. As a fact, it is evidence only of
Fludd’s point of view.

286

-- Page 318 --
English Rosicrucianism

universals with eyes of understanding. The reform in the
department of Medicine is in the recognition and attain-
ment of the one and only medicament, being that of Hippo-
crates, and an accurate understanding of its composition,
virtues and operations. In Alchemy the way of advance-
ment is to realise that its true work is a work of Nature only,
and that he who would co-operate therewith must use
natural matrices in place of artificial furnaces, applying
natural things to things which are also natural and “ species
to their congruents.” But the canonical writers on alchemy
had borne their testimony to these irrepealable canons of
the art through several generations prior to Robert Fludd.

Like Simon Studion and like Paracelsus yet earlier, the
TRacratus maintains that there are Books of God, both
visible and invisible, that Nature herself is written within
and without, that the universe around us is full of mystical
characters, and that because of these things “day unto
day uttereth speech and night unto night sheweth know-
ledge.” The stars also are a voice in the silence, and
astrology carries a great book of portents for those who can
read therein. ‘The distinctions of Fludd on the kinds
and classes of Magia are unfolded with considerable
elaboration, to exonerate the Rosicrucian Order from
charges advanced by Libavius and others on the subject
of the Black Art. Venific, necromantic, goetic, malefic
and so-called theurgic Magic are set apart as so many
forms of diabolical commerce; but that which concerns
the Order is of another category, inspired by other motives
and derived from a celestial source, being that perfect
knowledge of natural things, above and below, in heaven
and on earth, by which the three Kings of the East were
led in the light of a new star, even to the cradle of Him
Who-—because He is the Sun of Righteousness—is the
true Light of the World. After this manner is Robert
Fludd led on in fine to treat of the Mysteries of Light and

287

-- Page 319 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
the blessed state of those who have come to understand
its virtues as the cause of all energies.

It is in moments like these that the Kentish theosophist
becomes worthy of a higher title than the technical designa-
tion of a Philosopher by Fire—which was held in the past
to characterise the alchemical fraternity at large He
was a philosopher by the Light in Christ: whether at
his best or worst, he wrote always therein ; and as I believe
that he lived under it, so I have no doubt that the light
abode within him. With the sole exception of PHILosoPHia
Mosarca his chief works have never been put into English,
and only in the case of Tracratus APoLOGETICUs was a second
edition attained. It was translated into German in 1782
by Adam Booz at Leipsic,? who appended certain annota-
tions which are curious contributions to the text and
reproduce its spirit after the lapse of over one hundred
and sixty years. We hear of the art of Palingenesis, said
to have been discovered and made known by the naturalist

1 It is used by Anthony 4 Wood in his description of Fludd and of other
Hermetic literati whose biographies are found in ATHenm® Oxontensss.
When it first began to be current remains an open question but certainly
it did not originate with the pupil of Peter Sthael.

2“ DerencE OF THE GENUINE CHARACTER OF THE SOCIETY OF THE
Rosicructans, by the Englishman Roprrtus pe Fiucrisus, Doctor of the
Medical Fraternity of London. Translated from the Latin into German by
request, and on account of its great rarity and importance, together with certain
annotations, by ApaM Booz. Leipsic: published by ApaM Freperic BOHME.
1782.” Itis probably to Booz in the first instance that Kloss was indebted for
the story that John Dee dedicated his edition of Roger Bacon’s tract to the
Rosicrucian Fraternity. The note of Booz is as follows: ‘“ The annotations
of John Dee upon the treatise of Roger Bacon entitled THz Wonpers oF
Arr anp Nature anp THe Nutiiry or Macic are included with the said
tract in THeatruM CuEmicumM, vol. §, and are prefaced by a dedication to
the Rosicrucians which is couched thus: Clarissimis Restitutionis Universt
Phosphoris Illuminatis Rosem Crucis Fratrisus umanimis, Herein is the
Society overwhelmed with powerful and deserved praises. Robert Fludd is
mentioned—in a most complimentary manner—in the preface, while the
objector Libavius is completely and properly despatched.” Like those who
repeated this unhappy reference subsequently, the excellent Booz had failed
to read his text intelligently.

288

-- Page 320 --
English Rosicrucianism
Buoss in Aura, though I think that the mythos goes back
into a much further past?; of everlasting books and
ever-burning lamps,? like those which were found in the
sepulchre of Christian Rosy Cross, according to his
legend in the Fama.
The Tractatus APOLOGETICUS was followed by a TRac-
1 It is explained that by means of a magnetic electrum the rays of the
Sun and Moon are drawn out of a viscous water and thus it becomes
crystalline. There is nothing added, but in the space of four weeks wonder ful
starry flowers grow up herein. These flowers can be resolved again into
water by a little aqua de nubibus and can be passed through blotting-paper.
But in the space of another four weeks the flowers will be produced once
mote, reassuming their former shapes. ‘‘ When the sun shines they diffuse
such a radiance that the eye cannot support it.” Adam Booz adds that an
experiment of this kind took place on May 28, 1776, before “ many noble
persons,” and it seems to have been recorded in Tue Hamaurc CorreE-
SPONDENT, IV, 127, of that year. “ Should lovers of these wonderful flowers
ar desire ocular demonstration,” he affirms finally, “it will be supplied
with full instructions, so that no one can fail therein.” It is said that the
flowers could be transported from place to place, either in dry or fluid
condition.

2 Tt is related that the Count of Carburi at Venice rediscovered incom-
bustible paper, and that the Senate caused a medal to be struck in his honour
ad perpetuam ret memoriam. The paper was made in the first instance by
Marco Antonio Castagne, overseer of some mines in Italy, where he found a
great quantity of amianthus stones, out of which he prepared incombustible
skins, paper and lamp-wicks. 1 may explain here that Amianthus, according
to Rulandus in his Lexicon Ancuimrz, is practically identical with asbest

2 . . . . 08
and mica. It is described by Dioscorides and Pliny. Booz goes on to point
out that “if the famed incombustible oil were discovered once again, ever-
lasting lamps and eternal fire would become ours,” adding that they were
frequent among the ancients. The artist Castagne, on the basis of Lis own
achievement, is said to have promised a book made of amianthus, “as t
binding, paper and thread.” He would write in it with lett "ld “so
that the vol 1 y : etters of gold, “so

matt es olume wou d not only be incombustible but would be safe from the
effects of water and air, and might truly deserve the tit!
The EF. é i e title of Book of Eternit
a The Hrraing Bask” Bote fo he Purasonicas Tensaacion
\ , ’ RUM
carried the inquiry further. Reeders if ene ve Pea 435, but I have not
GETICUS may remember that he constructed a wood u 5 s Tractatus APoLo-
bellowed after the fashion of the living ani 1 ” on bal which lowed and
account of an automaton chess- 18% ane Booz caps this story by his
compete with anyone but “ there woe » which was not only ready to
having lost a game,” no recorded example of the figure
U 289

-- Page 321 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
rvatus THEOLoGo-PuiLosopPuHicus, concerning Life, Death
and Resurrection, which was dedicated in the sub-title
to those who are called Brethren of the Rosy Cross.t ‘There
is a story—originating with Bithle—that when Michael
Maier left England he carried the manuscript of this
work to Germany and saw it through the press in that
country ; but I have failed to find anything in support
of the statement. It is a strange, enchanting book, perhaps
with regard especially to its speculations concerning
Paradise and how—as we learn otherwise from the Zonar
—there is a Paradise here below but a Paradise also above :
unus erat ille terrestris, seu supra terram descriptus ; alter
supercelestis et quast intra novam ‘Ferusalem situs, qua
totaliter spiritualis est.2 But I am concerned with the
Tractatus only in so far as it can be gleaned for occasional
references to the Order. It is divided into three books,
corresponding to its three subjects. Towards the end of
the first there is a consideration of the admirable knowledge
enjoyed by Moses and Elias, and it is said to be a true key
of wisdom. Out of this arises the question whether it
has been taken utterly away from mankind, having regard
to the fact that—according to the Boox or Wispom—
the spirit of God fills the whole earth and God has sent
down His wisdom from the holy heavens, that it may
dwell with man and with him also may work. The answer
is that the delight of the Spirit of God is with the sons
of men, that even unto this day it has remained with elect
persons who are pure of heart, that the Sons of God have
1 Tractatus THEOLOGO-PHILosopHicus, in Libros tres distributus, quorum
de Vita, Morte, Resurrectione. Cui inseruntur nonulla Sapientie veterts,
Adami infortunto superstitis, fragmenta; ex profundiort Sacrarum Literarum
sensu et lumine, atque ex limpidort et liquidiori saniorum Philosopborum fonte
hausta atque collecta, Frarripus a Cruce Rosga dictis, dedicata, a RuDOLFO
Ocres Bairanno. Oppenheim, 1617. There has been no question as to the
authorship of this tract, and the adopted name decodes by transposition into
Roberto Fludo.
® Op. cit., Lib. I, cap. 9.
290

-- Page 322 --
English Rosicrucianism

been always in the world, that to such has been given the
Tree of Life and to such the Hidden Manna. But the
powers of men like these are unknown at this day and
unknown are their Holy Houses. They abound in heavenly
riches but are poor in the sight of the world. They are
not doctors in theology, nor is the Pope himself one of
them, though he appears to possess the seat of Jesus Christ.
The real and efficacious gifts of the Spirit are prophecy,
miracles, tongues, healing: those who come forward to
proclaim hidden truths must manifest these powers, must
be able to drive out demons and in their own lives must
observe the Divine precepts, doing nothing contrary to
the word of God.

Who were the representatives of this elect school in the
days of Robert Fludd? They were the Brethren of the
Rosy Cross, whom he proceeds to address at length: (1)
As a result of close investigation, he has been led to the
conclusion that they are illuminated truly by the Spirit
and that to them are unfolded those things which the
sacred texts have foreshewn mystically as preceding the
end of the world. (2) They have been endowed with
spiritual virtue and the higher Divine Grace. (3) If their
deeds correspond to their words—and he can doubt no
longer that they do—that which they prophesy on their
own part must be accepted in faith, more especially as
it is in perfect harmony with the sacred source of
truth. (4) By an attentive study of their writings he has
found that they act under the impulsion of the Holy
Spirit. (5) They have knowledge of the true mystery and
of that key which leads to the joy of Paradise. (6) They
have therefore the freedom of Paradise, even as Elias of old.
(7) To them it is no cause of pride that they are able to
make gold, but they rejoice when the heavens open and
at the sight of their names written in the Book of Life.!

1 Compare Fama FRATERNITATIS.
291

-- Page 323 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

(8) Transferring the appeal to those whose minds are
obscured by a cloud of ignorance, Robert Fludd invites
mankind at large to agree with him that the Brethren of
the Rosy Cross are guided by the Spirit of God, that their
asylum—the House of the Holy Spirit—is situated at the
world’s end, and is there encompassed by clouds, or that
it is on the apex of a high mountain and that those who
dwell therein breathe in the sweet and rarefied air of the
Psyche, or the life of true wisdom.

In the book concerning resurrection the Brethren are said
to abide in a light which is greater than that of the rising
sun. ‘Their celestial treasure is contrasted with the metallic
gold which is sought after by errant and false alchemists.
The sun in the roof of the tomb of Christian Rosy Cross is
said to have been an emblem of Christ, the Sun of Justice,
and there is another reference to His advent. It will be
seen that thus early in Fludd’s defence of the Order, and
thus early in its manifest history, the process of its spirit-
ualisation had begun in the hands of the Kentish mystic ;
but it was to be carried yet further. Already in his pre-
vision concerning the New Jerusalem, descending four-square
out of heaven, it would seem that the Rosicrucians were
warders of the gates and keepers of the sacred precincts, if
they were not also the priests and rulers therein, under Him
Who is the light thereof and the Tree of Life in its midst.

Supposing the Rosicrucian manifestoes to have emanated
from a corporate society or that they led—as perhaps
intended—to such a foundation soon after they were
issued, the Tractatus Apro.oceticus lends some colour
to a supposition that Fludd was acquainted with the Order
“as to their persons,” to cite the quaint expression made use
of by Thomas Vaughan in a similar but reverse connection.”

1 Tue Fame anp ConFrssion oF THE Fraternity of R..C.. . . . With
a Preface annexed thereto... . By Evcentus PuivaLeTues. 1652. Preface, c. 3
(obverse). Seealso A. E. Warre: The Works of Thomas Vaughan, 1919, p- 365-

292

-- Page 324 --
English Rosicrucianism

But again it is entirely a matter of inference, and
amidst its quaint and melancholy panegyric upon the
majesty of the science of the past there is no light of
detail shed upon the original documents or upon the
association which it defends. The fact may seem explicable
on its surface by regarding Robert Fludd as a novice im
absentia, far away from the seat of authority, and we shall
see that at a later period he adopts another tone. But one
of the amazing things connected with the whole debate is
the existence of so considerable a literature dealing, or
professing to deal, with a single subject, which neither
friends nor enemies have succeeded in elucidating. From
one point of view the subsequent writings of Fludd—which
are of some importance as a presentation of the Secret
Tradition in Christian Times, coloured in its passage
through the alembic of a singular mind—might be called
a development at large of Rosicrucian philosophy. Putting
aside some few things which are purely polemical, like
a negligible answer to Foster on the question of the
Weapon Salve, they might have been issued from first to
last with the imprimatur of the Rosy Cross, as they contain
no line or word which is not in complete consonance with
the claims made by the Order and with the teaching
thereto ascribed by all its German literature. I am con-
cerned, however, only with the works of Fludd in so far as
they cast direct additional light on the doctrine of the
Rosy Cross. For a most careful and satisfactory account
of those vast treatises which are concerned with the
Macrocosm and Microcosm, with Meprcrna CatTuouica,
Mosaical Philosophy and Anatomy the reader may be
referred with full confidence to Archdeacon Craven’s
study of Fludd and his philosophy.

It was not until 1629 that Robert Fludd was called again
to the defence of the Rosicrucian Brotherhood, and then

1 Op. cit., passim.
293

-- Page 325 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

it was owing to charges brought against himself and his
system by Marin Mersenne in a certain commentary on
Genesis.t_ Fludd answered under his own name in Soru1®
cum Moria Cerramen,? but this was a defence of himself
and his principles. Book I deals with the Kentish philoso-

her’s views on the science and philoso of the Macro-
P Pawosop ;
cosm, the harmony of the world, etc. So far from being
new, it is affirmed that the wisdom of past ages is embodied
therein, and the charge of atheism preferred ridiculously
against him is exposed in its true light. The second book
maintains in opposition to Mersenne that there is a soul
of the world. In the third Fludd puts up a powerful
defence against the charge of evil magic, which would not
have been advanced had Mersenne known the subjects
with which he was seeking to deal. In the fourth and last
book Fludd vindicates his particular construction of
Kabalistic tradition, not—however—that Mersenne can
be looked upon as a serious assailant who regarded the
tradition as wrested. These four books may be called,
I think, an apologia at large for the philosophical life of
its author. The Fratres R..C'. are mentioned on the
crowded title-page but not in the text. It was, however,
a year of peculiar activity in the literary concerns of Fludd,
and the publication with which I am dealing included also
a tract called Summum Bonvm, issued under the name of
Joachim Fritz. There would not be the least doubt in

1 Quzstiones CELEBERRIMA IN GENESIM, cum accurata textus explicatione,
tn quo volumine Athet et Deisti impugnantur. Paris, 1622. Archdeacon
Craven says that Mersenne was a literary friend of Descartes and “a man of
universal learning.”

® Soputz cum Morita Certamen, in quo Lapis Lydius a Falso Structore,
Fr. Marino Mersenno, Monacho Reprobatus, celeberrima Voluminis sut
Babylonici (in Genesin) figmenta accurate examinat. Authore Roperto Fiupp,
alias pr Fiuctizus, etc. Frankfurt, 1629.

3 Summum Bonu, Quad est Verum Subjectum Vere Magia, Cabala,
Alchymia, Frarrum Ross Crucis verorum, in dictarum Scientiarum laudem,
ef insignis calumniatoris Frarris Marini MERSENNI dedecus publicatum, Per
Joacnimum Frizium. Anno 1629.

294

-- Page 326 --
English Rosicrucianism

my mind that this also was the work of Robert Fludd,
were it not for his own testimony. Everything about it
recalls the man and his methods, including the elaborate
tables, the setting forth of Mersenne’s criticisms and of
the replies thereto. Moreover, the style, spirit and views
are those of the English Rosicrucian. But on p. 20 of
Cravis PuiLosopHi@ et ALcHYMIm® Fiuppan#, referring
to Summum Bonum, Fludd remarks as follows: Licet hoc
non meum, sed amici met intimi opus esse alibi asseverarim,
adding, however, the following qualification : tamen ad omnes
Lanovit Theologo-militis, gladio malevolentie me petentts,
objectiones (quippe mere frivolas) respondebo, the explanation
being that Lanovius had attacked Fludd in attacking
Summum Bonvum. I have only to add that there is and
can be no appeal from the testimony of the Kentish
philosopher.?

It will be seen that Summum Bonum was a further reply
to Mersenne and as regards three-fourths of the contents
it covers much the same ground as the CertaMeNn. Book I
treats of Magic ; Book II is a study of Kabalism, regarded
as a Mystery of God and Nature transmitted in secret ;
Book TIT deals with the essentia of true Alchemy, under-
stood as a spiritual science and distinguished therefore

1 Archdeacon Craven, who is unacquainted with this testimony, registers
a taking but not convincing point when he cites from Summum Bonu an
affirmation on the part of the author that he “ had already defended ” the
Rosicrucian Brethren in a tract. It seems obviously a reference to the
Tracratus Apotoceticus, but it does not warrant us in saying with Craven
that “whoever was author of the Tractarus Arozoceticus was also
author of the Summum Bonum.”? Joachim Fritz was not Robert Fludd, but
he may have written one of the other apologies which came out by the score
or the hundred before 1629. It is to be noted, in conclusion as to this
question, that on p. 26 of the Cravis Fludd makes his printer responsible for
placing Summum Bonumat the end of the CerTaMeEn against his own mandate
to the contrary. He desired it to appear separately and in octavo, not in
folio. The printer excused himself, maintaining that if both tracts, seeing
that they belonged to one and the same subject, were included in one
volume, it would be more useful and convenient.

295

-- Page 327 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
from “‘ vain tinctures ” and sophistic operations. ‘There is
finally Book IV, “ wherein the cause of the Brotherhood
of the Rosy Cross... is strenuously and powerfully
defended.” 1 The memorable points in connection with
this exoneration are: (1) The entire Rosicrucian claim is
transferred to the spiritual plane, shining in the light of
an exalted Christian Theosophy: it has become a Hidden
Church of the Elect, in striking analogy with the Sanctuary
of Karl Eckartshausen, the Interior Church of Lupukhin
and the Mystic Temple of the Philadelphian Society.
(2) The author of Summum Bonvm bears his testimony
with the plenary certitude of one speaking from within:
it is expressed with fervent devotion ; and that it should
be the work of an enthusiast about a House of the Holy
Spirit of which he knows only by report appears incredible.
But finally (3) as to their persons, names, places or anything
concrete concerning them and their doings—in a word
the external evidences—the apologia tells us nothing
respecting the Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross. Once more,
there may be good reasons, because it was a secret society
and must be concealed even in manifestation, but the in-
formation is not there and Summum Bonvm leaves the
historical position of the Order precisely where it was
previously. Mersenne and many hundreds before him
had asked ‘‘ Where is the dwelling of the Brethren?”
understood as an incorporated Society which had offered
initiation at large to suitable persons in an official publica-
tion called Fama Fraternitatis.2. To answer that it is

1 In quo causa Fratrum Rosem Crucis (ques etiam petit malevolus iste
per calumniam et malitiam) strenue et virtliter defenditur.

* The position is that after the manner of their mystical founder they
had taken credit for a bountiful readiness to impart all their secrets to the
learned, that “ the number and respect of our Fraternity ” may be increased
thereby, an offer which is bequeathed in the Fama for those who are con-
cerned to ponder. In this connection I may mention that Fludd is quoted
as follows by Alexander Wilder: ‘ There is scarcely one who thinks about
us who does not believe that our Society has no existence, because, as he truly

296

-- Page 328 --
English Rosicrucianism

in a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens,
transfers the question to a very high region indeed but can
satisfy mo one under all the circumstances. With the
Holy Assemblies, Interior Churches and Hidden Temples
which have not issued pourparlers the case is different :
they have been heard of under other warrants—to be
taken or left—and they have promised nothing.

On this understanding and under such reserve, the in-
timations of Summum Bonum are exceedingly curious
as the defence of an Order which less than twenty years
previously had claimed incorporation in space and time,
a local habitation and the palladium of a hallowed tomb,
somewhere in the German Fatherland. The heads of the
Fritz consideration are as follows: (1) The counsel at
large of the Order and its object—expressed briefly—are
embodied in the pregnant sentence: Ascendamus ad montem
rationabilem et edificamus Domum Sapientia, thus defining
the Brotherhood as a Company of Spiritual Builders.
(2) The corner-stone of this Building is Christ, while those
who are integrated in the House are the Living Stones
thereof. (3) The qualification required of aspirants is
promulgated in a Rosicrucian Epistle attached to Summum
Bonum: Transmutemint, transmutemini de lapidibus mortuis
in lapides vivos philosophicos. (4) I shall shew in a later
chapter that the mons rationabilis, the Secret Mountain
has entered into Rosicrucian allegorical literature indepen-
dently of Robert Fludd and has been called a philosophical
Horeb. (5) That which is built thereon, according to
Summum Bonu, is a Spiritual Palace, a House founded on
the rock, the Holy Place of a Holy Priesthood. (6) The
declares, he never met any of us. And he concludes that there is no such
Brotherhood because, in his vanity, we seek not him to be our fellow.” Ido
not happen to have met with this passage in Fludd’s writings, nor has
Archdeacon Craven apparently, so I quote it under all reserves. From what
T know of Dr. Wilder’s methods, it is probably drawn at second hand, and in
any case no reference is given. See Tue Tueosopuist, I, p. 110.

297

-- Page 329 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

place and its priesthood are filled with all heavenly riches,
though the Brotherhood are poor and unknown in the eyes
of the world. (7) The dwellers in the House are those who
are instructed, like Solomon, in true and Divine Magia,
the true Kabalah and Chemia. (8) There have been a few
always in the world who have gone in through the gate
of this Temple, to be numbered among the Sons of God,
who have shed their ight upon humanity and illuminated™
the cloud of darkness which covers earthly things. (9)
Temple, Palace or Coenobium, the House of the Holy
Spirit and House of the Rosy Cross—as may be collected
from the words of the Brotherhood—is that of which
the sacred pages speak. (10) It is the House of God, while
the Stone of Foundation is that which was cut out without
hands, which broke the feet of “ the statue of false wor-
ship”? and became a great mountain, filling the whole
earth. (11) The House itself is no work of human construc-
tion, as foolish alchemists and sophistic Magi dream: it
was built of old in wisdom. (12) It is the mystical Citadel
of Bethlehem *—a House of Bread and Warfare, of Living
Bread, even as that Manna which came down from Heaven.
(13) Escam dedit timentibus se, and by such Food of Angels
it is possible for every man to live without mortal bread.

‘Two things remain to be noted: (1) at the end of Sum-
muM Bonvm its concealed author anticipates the question
whether he is himself a Brother of the Rosy Cross. ‘The
answer is skilful, implying a decisive affirmative while on the
surface pretending to leave the question open. Such a
grace from God has he least of all deserved: ‘it is not of

1 Compare Fama Fraternitatis: (1) “That there might be also a
Society in Europe which should have gold, silver and precious stones,
sufficient to bestow upon kings for their lawful use and purpose ” ; (2) “ We
do promise more gold than both the Indies bring to the King of Spain.”

2 The name Bethlehem is supposed to have signified House of Bread or
alternatively House of War. Fludd connects it with Bethel, the attributed
meaning of which is House of God.

298

-- Page 330 --
English Rosicrucianism

him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that
sheweth mercy.”! Yet, if it have pleased God to have so
ordained, this shall be enough.? (2) The Rosicrucian letter
appended to Summum Bonum was addressed, it is said, by
the Brotherhood to a certain German, Dr. Fludd obtaining
a copy from a Polish friend of Dantzic.? In Archdeacon
Craven’s opinion it conveys “a poor idea of the teaching or
erudition of the Brotherhood.” If, however, it can be
regarded as a genuine official document, it is exceedingly
important as indicating the spiritual dedications of the
Order at the period to which it belongs. It is, of course,
unsupported by anything which can be regarded as legal
evidence and must therefore stand at its value according to
the impression which it may convey to the literary sense
of the reader. It is undated and there is hence no means
of knowing how far it anteceded the year of publication,
namely, 1629. The content may be scheduled in summary
form as follows :

(1) The unknown person to whom it is addressed has
completed the first year of his nativity, meaning his birth
into the Order, and he is wished a felicitous “‘ entrance into
and exit ” from life—an allusion to the life of initiation and
the kind of departure which will be reached when he is
raised to Heaven. (z) He is counselled to make progress
in true knowledge, on the understanding that God is both
the circumference and the centre. (3) It is small cause for
wonder that an ungrateful world persecutes the professors

1 Romans ix, 16.

2 Anne tu ex Rosem Crucis Fratercuris unus? Ad ultimam interro-
gationem dico, me minime tantam unquam a Deo meruisse gratam, agnos-
centem cum Apostolo, non est istud donum volentis aut currentis sed Dei miseres-
centis; si Deo placuisset voluisse sat erit, The Vuucare reading of the text
is: Igitur non volentis, neque currentis, sed miserentis est Det,

3 One is disposed to speculate whether the Polish friend may be the
concealed author of Summum Bonum, whether he was the recipient of the
letter—perhaps several years previously—and was therefore a neophyte of
the Order in one of its developments or variants.

299

-- Page 331 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
of true arts, or indeed the truth itself. (4) For the sake,
however, of their neophyte, the Order proposes to deal with
three recurring questions among those who are without,
being firstly its existence as a Brotherhood, secondly the
activities with which it is concerned and thirdly the limits
of its powers. I am afraid that no subtlety of interlinear
reading can extract any answer to these questions from the
text of the perfervid oration,! but the Fellowship of the
Order is with the Father and Jesus, for which reason the
Brethren address their recipient, so that he may rejoice
“because God is light and in Him there is no darkness
whatever.” (5) Those who would come to them must havea
gift of discernment in this light, for in any other it is
impossible to behold the Brethren, unless they will it.?
(6) An answer is not vouchsafed to all because there are
many of deceitful mind.? (7) Those who are alienated
from God are contrary to the Brethren and it would be
folly to permit their entrance. (8) Be they changed
therefore from dead stones into living philosophical stones.*
(9) Let them follow the counsel of the apostle and have the
same mind within them as there is in Christ Jesus. (10)
The office of the Order is to lead back lost sheep to the
true sheepfold. (11) Its Immovable Palace is the centre

1 An old English version of the Epistie printed in extenso was in my
Rear History oF THE Rosicrucians: it must be admitted that the con-
fused expression and continual deviation from the proposed subjects justify
the opinion of Archdeacon Craven.

2 This is quoted—without reference to the source—in the Anima Macica
Assconpira of Eugenius Philalethes. See my Worxs or THomas VauGHAN,
1919, p. 107. See also p. 364, where it is quoted again in the Introduction to
the Fama and Conrzssio.

3 It seems to me that this remark indicates that the EpisrLe was written
somewhat early in the Rosicrucian debate. Disappointed applicants for
admission had wearied of the subject long before 1629, and new applications
had ceased,

« This aphorism is found also in the Rosicrucian document published by
Eugenius Philalethes in Lumen pz Lumine. Works or THomas VAUGHAN,
PP. 259 et seg.

300

-- Page 332 --
English Rosicrucianism

of all things, but it is concealed by many names. (12) It is
the gate and school of Philosophical Love, wherein ever-
lasting charity is taught. (13) It is that resplendent but
invisible Castle which is built upon the Mountain of the
Lord, “ out of the root whereof there flows forth a fountain
of living water and a river of love.” (14) It is lawful to
know Heaven by Heaven, not by earth, but the virtues
of earth are known by those of Heaven. (15) Virtue is the
supreme truth, and it will confirm those daily more and
more who follow it with all their might in words and
works, (16) The writer affirms in conclusion that the said
Lady Virtue has commanded him to make these com-
munications at this time to the recipient, but he shall be
taught more largely hereafter, if he will keep surely that
which has been committed to his trust.

There is no doubt in my mind that this document was
going about at the period as a missive which had emanated
from the inner circle of the Rosy Cross. When we come
to examine the testimony which was borne to the subject
by Thomas Vaughan at a later period in England we shall
meet with several analogies, and it would appear therefore
that the construction placed by Joachim Fritz on the ends
and objects of the Fraternity was not exclusive to himself,
though it was illuminated by Fludd’s genius. The ordered
contentions of Summum Bonum—which he must have
inspired, though he did not write—compare very favourably
with the hectic and confused Epistle, but the issue and
intention are one in both cases.

It has been said with considerable force by Bihle—and
Archdeacon Craven who has followed the debate at first
hand adopts the same view—that Mersenne was no match
for Fludd and one who was much more able came to the
rescue in the person of Petrus Gassendus.! Fludd was

1 He was a French astronomer and philosophical writer, born on Jan.
22, 1592, and he died at Paris, Oct. 24, 1655. His first published volume

301

-- Page 333 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
embroiled also with Franciscus Lanovius,! as he had been
previously with Kepler. In 1633 Fludd published his last
words on the general subjects at issue in Cuavis PHILOSOPHIE
ET ALCHYMIZ Fiuppanz,* already quoted; but we are
concerned with his answer only in so far as it connects with
the problem of the Rosy Cross. Except when he speaks for
himself—as it were, from his own platform—and then only
on his personal understanding of Mystical and Divine
alchemy—it is the dull record of an arid scholastic quarrel, ~
about which we need note only that Fludd, with his vast
learning, rather disdained Mersenne, while Fludd and
Gassendus really respected each other. Lanovius seems
to have been of no particular consequence on either side
of the debate. It appears that the Brethren of the Rosy
Cross had been called libertines by this writer, and having
was certain EXERCITATIONES PARADOXIC# ADVvERSUS ArisToTELEos. It
appeared at Grenoble in 1624. The work in reply to Fludd was published at
Paris in 1630 under the title: Episrotica ExeRciTaTio, im qua precipua
principia philosophie Roperti Fiuppi deteguntur, et ad recentes tllius libros
adversus Patrem Marinum Mersennum seriptos respondetur.

1 JT have failed to trace Lanovius. He is not to be identified with
Frangois de la Noue, called Bras-le-Fer and also un moraliste militaire du
seiziéme siécle. He is included among the great captains of France. Among
his books is a Derensio veriratis adversus assertiones Catholice Fidei repug-
nantes. 1594.

2 Cravis PoitosopHive ET ALCHYMUE FLuppana, sive Roserti Fiuppi
Armigeri et Medicine Doctoris ad Epistolicam Petri Gassenp1 Theologi
Exercitationem Responsum. .. . Francoforti, Anno 1633. A thin folio set
closely in small type and an unfavourable specimen of the Fludd mode of
book-production.

3 Archdeacon Craven tells us, however, that Mersenne was also a man of
learning, as we have seen in a previous note. His methods in criticism are
characteristic of debate at the period. Isaac Disraeli reminds us in AMENI-
Tres oF Lirerature of Mersenne expressing astonishment that King James I
should allow such a man as Fludd to live. The latter thereupon obtained
an interview with his sovereign, to clear himself of “ the Friar’s scandalous
report ”—i.e. that Fludd, among other things, was an atheist. He found the
King, as he says in his own words, “royally learned and gracious.” Finally,
“T found him my Kingly patron all the days of his life.” Where this account
is located in Fludd’s writings does not appear. I have failed to find it in
Sopur@ cum Morita CerTaMEn.

302

-- Page 334 --
Enghsh Rosicrucianism

affirmed that on the contrary they were true seekers of
Divine Mysteries, Fludd volunteers the following ex-
planation, which is at once remarkable for its period and
significant, in view of the anti-papal mouthings in Con-
FESSIO FRaTERNITATIS R..C.*..1 He establishes ex cathedra
that seekers of this kind are to be found in all religions—
Papal, Lutheran, Calvinistic and so forward. As such,
they adhere to the external Rites and Ceremonies which
characterise their particular form of faith, not that they
regard truth as concealed within outward observances,
for truth is divine. They are so many forms and offices
which express the principles of the sects, each after its
own manner, and they are diligently observed and respected
by every Brother of the Rosy Cross in accordance with the
religious school to which he belongs. They are of the laws
and politics of this or the other Church, and he regulates
his life in their path, lest he be a source of scandal to his
neighbours. So passes out of sight for ever the Fama’s
boasted dedication to the “‘ forms and ceremonies of the
first and renewed church,” its limitation of the sacraments
to two, and its knowledge of Jesus Christ according to the
self-styled orthodoxy of Lutheran reform. So passes
Conrrssio FRATERNITATIS, its execrations of the Roman
impostor, its expected fall of the triple crown. The
outward forms have become types of convention, while as
to their variations, each follows the rule of his own
conscience, and the elect are everywhere.

This is like a new star in Serpentarius or Cygnus; but
Fludd goes further still and puts on record his personal
conviction that all persons whatsoever may and shall be
accounted as true Brethren of the Rosy Cross if they are

11 observe that according to Kieswetter Cravis Puitosopure
Fiuppane states (p. 50) that the prosperity of the Rosicrucian Order was
short lived and hints also that it was transformed into Freemasonry. There
is no such statement, neither is there such indication.

303

-- Page 335 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

(1) rooted firmly in the Christian faith, (2) confirmed in the
knowledge of themselves and (3) consciously built up on
that corner-stone which is Christ Spiritual. The head of
all is Christ, of whose mystical body there are many
members. The point has become of such importance that
he returns thereon and repeats it with a slight variation
of form: “I affirm that every Theologus of the Church
Mystical is a real Brother of the Rosy Cross, wheresoever
he may be and under what obedience soever of the _
Churches politic.” Finally, he informs us that those
who used to be called Brethren of the Rosy Cross are
now termed the Wise—men of wisdom here on earth,
conditioned either in the search or attainment of Divine
Wisdom.

We may compare these affirmations and findings with
that commentary on the Laws of the Fraternity which
was published by Michael Maier in 1618.1 As we shall
see, he testifies to the fact of an incorporated Order in
unmistakable terms: for him it was a College of German
Philosophers of R..C... It was not apart from things
spiritual, but it was of the occult rather than of any
mystical movement. In the hands of Fludd it has been
spiritualised out of all likeness to its own earlier records,
while in Cuiavis PuitosopH1® it has evaporated to all
intents and purposes, unless indeed we elect to conclude
that under his headship, or that of others who were men
of his mind and spirit, the corporate body had transformed
into a secret House of spiritual election, the tradition,
knowledge and practice of which were concerned only with
the life that is hidden with Christ in God. We shall see

1 Maier had been dead for many years when Fludd published the Cuavis.
We should understand many things better if we could suppose that the
Order had fallen into the hands of the English theosophist in succession to
the German alchemist. But neither positive nor negative evidence is
available in this direction.

304

-- Page 336 --
English Rosicrucianism

whether there are later memorials which offer any indica-
tions along these lines. Meanwhile, in the symbolism of the
Latin Church we have heard of the Church Militant, the
Church Suffering and the Church Triumphant; but
of a Church Mystical—within that obedience or without—
I think that we hear for the first time from Robert Fludd.
I speak tentatively, as the reason of things requires, for in the
presence of the vast literature of theology, it is impossible
to speak certainly: if I am right, the use of such a term in
the particular set of connections is exceedingly significant.
It would not be without importance, had it been used
previously.

As he spiritualised the Rosy Cross—or bore witness
alternatively to the transfiguration which it may have
undergone otherwise—so Fludd spiritualised alchemy.
Even in the early days of Tracratus THEoLoco-PuiLo-
sopHicus the “divine balsam” of Paracelsus and his
followers had become celestial grace, but in Cravis Puito-
soPHIZ the work in creation of Christ the Word—ger
quem omnia facta sunt—is called ‘‘ Divine Alchemy,” and
it is more than a figure of speech. The work of the human
alchemist—all that which is characterised broadly as
belonging to the Magnum Opus—is in analogy with the
operation of the Holy Spirit, of the Word and the Wisdom
of God. The Philosopher’s Stone is most truly theosophical
in its virtues, or at least “ theo-philosophic.” Itisthe power
of God breathed forth and the influx of His Glory. The
fixed gold of the alchemists abides in the soul of man,
which is not only purified and exalted by the Christ-Stone
but is raised into eternal life. The Rosicrucians are
therefore concerned with no gold of the profanum vulgus,
no common silver or fire. The alchemical sublimation
signifies progression in virtue and ascent in the contempla-
tion of God which follows therefrom: it brings the soul
of man into the likeness of angels. Finally, in his catholic

x 305

-- Page 337 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
manner ‘Fludd says that the Rosicrucian’s subject of
chemistry, their Stone, their Regimen, being concerned
with the Corner Stone, or—as I read him—the attained
state of the Christhood, in no wise differs from that of all
holy and truly wise men.

Now if this were the testimony of one speaking alone
and awaking no echo anywhere in the second quarter of the
seventeenth century, it would still be difficult to suppose
that Robert Fludd, revolving in his scriptorium at Bearsted,
or by Mason’s Hall in Coleman Street, London City, the ~
claims of a Brotherhood of which he knew at first hand
nothing, should have reached such a grade of certitude, not
alone concerning their pursuits and dedications but also con-
cerning a new spirit which had passed over them, trans-
forming bothnameandnature. But he does not stand utterly
alone, as we shall see when we pass to the consideration of the
Rosy Cross in its connection with Maier, from 1621 onward
to 1624. He is certainly more highly inspired than are any
other voices, and he is at once the most responsible and
ascertainable of all the witnesses. We shall see further
that in and around the epoch of the French Revolution there
was an activity of the Rosy Cross in Germany and Russia
which at least appears to connect it with the spiritual side
of things. Of that for which, in some at least of the circles,
it stands at the present day we shall learn also, of pars
hereditatis su@ et calicis sui, and that if it were mindful
of personalities in things past or present, the Imperator
in temporibus omnibus might well be Robert Fludd. But
the Head is Christ. My inference is therefore that the
Kentish occult philosopher is more likely, in the general
reason of things, to have borne his witness on the basis of
what he knew at first hand than to have talked through long
years in a dream-state about the glories of the Rosy Cross
and the high attainments of those who carried its symbol
in their hearts and perhaps wore it on their breasts. Beyond

306

-- Page 338 --
English Rostcrucianism

this tentative view the question cannot be carried. It is
an interesting fact that Fludd was abroad during what may
be called the Rosicrucian formative period, or from 1598 to
1604, when Simon Studion was preparing an avant-courier of
all the symbolism in his vast treatise Naometria. Were I
a spokesman of Masonic Rosicrucian Societies, I should
proclaim in all their Colleges—as I have intimated—that
Fludd was acquainted with Studion and was by him
brought within the circle of adeptship. As it is, I
remember only that his natural and acquired dedications
were after the manner born of those to which the
Order itself confessed; but he had no part in Second
Advent zealotries, and he had no cause against the
Pope. If there be any call to say so, I am quite certain
that he did not found the Order of the Rosy Cross,
but he may have belonged to something at work under
that name, perhaps in 1617, and perhaps later. The
last point is speculative, but its consideration in the
light of other possibilities will be resumed at a later
stage.

I have not dwelt upon the external life of Fludd, which
is of no importance to my subject ; but as it may be desirable
to fix periods, let it be added that he was born in 1574,
while we have seen already that he died in 1637. He
graduated in arts at St. John’s College, Oxford, and in
medicine at Christ Church, on his return from abroad.
His history thereafter is practically that of his books, but
he has been called “eminent in his medical capacity.” In
so far as he was an occult philosopher and an occult prac-
titioner in medicine he seems second to none in his follies ;
but on the religious side of his nature, his personal sanctity
is reflected into his works and it is correct to call him a
notable Christian theosophist. It is this side of him which
comes into prominence in his later controversies on the sub-
ject of Rosicrucian claims. If he was ever connected with

397

-- Page 339 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
the Brotherhood as a member, either he found it holy or
sought to hallow it.

I should add that in Tue Freemason for January 22,
1910, an anonymous contributor furnished a mendacious
account of Fludd in connection with a quarterly meeting
of the Societas Rosicrucianain Ancuta. At this assembly
there was exhibited the photograph of an alleged Rosi-
crucian Cross and Chain said to have been worn by him as
head of the Order in England. The statements concerning it
were (1) that the originals were in the possession of a gentle- _
man in Hampshire who was a descendant of Sir Kenelm
Digby of the seventeenth century; (2) that this Digby
was Rosicrucian Chief in succession to Fludd ; (3) that the
articles had been handed down from generation to genera-
tion; and (4) that they had been identified by experts
as being the work of Southern Germany at the Fludd
period. ‘The part of fact in this story is separable easily
from the invented part; we can accept the gentleman
of Hampshire who possesses a Digby heirloom which is
indubitably a Rose Cross, and the photograph of which was
lent or given to the Soc ..Ros... Had it been accompanied
by those particulars of its history which appear in the
anonymous account it is obvious that the writer would
have mentioned a matter of such importance. In its
absence he had recourse to old fictions which speak of Fludd
and Digby as heads of the Rosicrucian Order in England,
as they speak of Thomas Vaughan in the same connection.
The historical and evidential value is much less than that
which attaches to Isaac Disraeli’s “‘ mysterious announce-
ment ” made in 1626, being an offer from an ambassador
or envoy of a “ President! of the Society of the Rosy Cross,”

1 It is to be noted that according to Burton, whose Anatomy or MELan-
cnoLy first appeared in 1621, the founder of the Rosy Cross was alive when
that work was being prepared for press. But it is obvious that Burton knew
of the Order and its claims only by hearsay.

308

-- Page 340 --
English Rosicrucianism
offering three millions sterling to enrich the royal coffers, if
only King Charles I would follow his advice.}

1 The story is extant in certain letters of the period, and according to
these it appears (1) that a mysterious stranger had been resident for two
years in London; (2) that he was, or claimed to be, the President of the
Rosy Cross ; (3) that he proposed, with the King’s “‘ allowance,” to send his
anointed messenger, being a “ young child,” otherwise “a youth,” on the
Sunday following November 20, 1626, presumably to ascertain whether His
Majesty would accept and follow his advice ; that in this case the promised
millions would be paid in the coming month of May; that the proffered
counsel would enable the King “ to suppress the Pope,” to “ advance his own
religion,” to bring ‘“‘ the Catholic King on his knees” and to convert the
Turks and Jews. The ambassador failed, however, to appear at Whitehall on
the day appointed. See Curiosities or Lirerarure, 5.9 Secret History of
Charles I.

399

-- Page 341 --
CHAPTER XI
A GREAT GERMAN ALCHEMIST

In or about the year 1568 and at Rendsberg in Holstein,
there was born Michael Maier, who became body-physician
to the Emperor Rudolph II and was ennobled by him.?
He became in this manner Count Michael Maier. A
doctor of philosophy as well as of medicine, he was also an
alchemist, and by his contributions to the literature of
Hermetic Art he stands not only head and shoulders above
his occult contemporaries in Germany, but in comparison
with him there is no writer of any consequence on the
subject—assuredly not Libavius. I am speaking, however,
within narrow limits, for Maier’s literary activities, which
began in 1614, were closed by his death at Magdebourg
in 1622. Another great name contemporary with his own
was that of the Hermetic mystic who wrote AMPHITHEATRUM
Sapienti£2 Atern#@, but Heinrich Khunrath—as we have
seen—died in 1601, long before any tract appeared from
the pen of Maier, his Hermetic co-heir. ‘There was also
Jacob Bohme, but he is not to be included among alchemists,
though he adapted some of their terminology to his purely
theosophical purpose.

Maier was a Lutheran of his period and by his hostility
to the Church and Court of Rome he would have been

1 Tam concerned only with three points in the life of Maier, (1) his visit
to England, (z) his literary output and (3) his connection with the Rosi-
crucian Brotherhood. I refer on other matters to the extended and excellent
monograph of Doctor J. B, Craven: Count Micnart Mater: Doctor of
Philosophy and of Medicine, Alchemist, Rosicrucian, Mystic. 1910.

310

-- Page 342 --
A Great German Alchemist
recommended to the high consideration of those who
produced the Conressto Fraternitatis R..C... He
appears like Fludd to have been a man of personal devotion,
and in the preface to a work published after his death he
is described by a friend (1) as a regular attendant at the
House of God ; (2) as a Christian in life and conversation ;
and (3) as one who practised on his own part the charity
recommended by Christ in the parable of the Good
Samaritan. I mention these facts at the beginning of my
analytical account of his writings, from the standpoint of
their Rosicrucian connections, to establish the position of
their author. Asa follower of Martin Luther, he accepted
that reformer’s doctrine of consubstantiation, which places
the Christian Mystery of the Eucharist in a very different
light from the commemorative observance of common English
protestantism. One of his publications, with which we
shall be concerned shortly on account of its Rosicrucian
references, is entitled Sympota Aure@ Mens@ and has been
termed a symposium, presumably because of the word
Table in the title ; but it is a treatise in twelve books, each
of which is devoted to one of the most famous alchemists,
e.g., Raymund Lully, Arnold of Villanova and so forth.
Their particular presentation of the Art is set forth in the
first place, followed by a counter-thesis and finally by a
rejoinder and summary, as a judgment on the side of the
alchemist. I am concerned, however, with a single case
only : the eleventh book is devoted to Melchior Cibinensis,
described as a Hungarian Adept, but he is wnknown
otherwise in the golden chain of Hermes, and it occurs to
me that, by possibility, he has been invented by Maier for
the purpose which I am about to unfold. He is described
as one who has graduated in “ the Hidden Mysteries of
the Hidden Science ” and also in some form of Christian
priesthood, but whether official or secret does not emerge
from the story. A copperplate in the text depicts

311

-- Page 343 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

him celebrating Mass in elaborate sacerdotal vestments.
In: the person of this exponent of the debate, Maier
represents the Mass as a work of the hidden science and the
sanctuary of its Mysteries, which are those of the Philoso-
pher’s Stone. It is said also (1) that in the Sacrament of the
Altar are concealed the most profound secrets of spiritual
Alchemy; (2) that the perfection of the Great Work is
the birth of the Philosopher’s Stone in the Sacred
Nativity ; (3) that its sublimation is the Divine Life and
Passion ; (4) that the black state represents the death on
Calvary; and (5) that the perfection of the red state
corresponds to the resurrection of Easter and.the Divine
Life thereafter. It is added that “these earthly things
are a picture of those which are heavenly ” and finally that
Lapis itaque ut homo.

There is no question that these citations from a work at
an early stage of his literary life are very important for the
mystical dedications of Michael Maier, though the scope
of their meaning may be exaggerated. It must not be
taken to signify that German alchemy at its highest—
either generally or in many particular cases—was a Mystery
of Divine attainment reached through the Eucharistic sacra-
ment, but rather that through this channel of grace a
transmuting tincture was communicated to the soul which
was in rigorous analogy, mutatis mutandis, with the phy-
sical tincture which transmuted base metals; and otherwise
that the states and stages of the material alchemical work
were in correspondence with the redemptive work of Christ.
But having established this on the evidential basis of the
wording in Sympoza Avre& Mensa it follows notwithstand-
ing that Maier regarded the Eucharist from the standpoint
of a true sacramentalist and was eminently one who might
have passed over from a quixotic concern in physics to the
transcendental science of Spiritual Alchemy, for which
“the sacred forms of the Mass” are either its representa-

312

-- Page 344 --
A Great German Alchemist
tive, veridic symbols or Spiritual Alchemy is the science of a
super-valid Eucharist. There is no doubt in my own mind
that these purposely contrasted alternatives are differentiated
aspects of one Great Mystery, which has also other aspects
in the natural and sacramental worlds.
The first publication of Maier is referable or at least
referred by bibliographers to the year 1614, there being
no date on the title-page, and is called Arcana Arcanis-
SIMA, a discourse in six books, which are occupied in
placing on Egyptian and Greek mythology the same
kind of alchemical construction as was performed long
afterwards and on a much larger scale by the French
Hermetist, Abbé Pernety. It would be interesting,
though here impossible, to compare the two schemes of
interpretation, the second of which owed almost certainly
nothing whatever to the former. It remains to point
out that Arcana Arcanissima was published in the same
year as Fama Frarernitatis, probably prior thereto, and
that no rumours of the Rosy Cross appear in its discussions.
It seems quite certain that Michael Maier was not ab origine
symboli connected with the Order and was in any case not
one of the hypothetical theosophists who put forth its
first manifesto to learn the judgment of Europe thereupon.
We shall see in due course that his entrance into the debate
is posterior to the chief official publications—if I may
venture so to term them—and is sufficiently late to present
a silent but eloquent commentary on certain reveries which
suppose that he visited England as if carrying a commission
to spread knowledge concerning the Rosy Cross and its
claims.1
For the fact of this visit there is very full evidence,
both positive and presumptive, in the writings of Maier.
1 Mr. Wigston is one who offends in this manner, but it is owing to
mental confusion among a mass of undigested material and not to the
familiar disposition to sacrifice fact on the altar of hypothesis,
313

-- Page 345 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
The period at which it occurred and the length of his
sojourn must remain open questions. As a matter of
mere speculation, I incline to think that it was in 1614, but
subsequent to the appearance of Arcana ArcaAnissima!
and he had returned to the Continent when Dr Circuito
Puysico Quaprato was published in 1616, being the
second work proceeding from his pen. The latter was
followed by Lusus Serius, which belongs to the year
1617. So far as evidence is concerned, Maier was
not preoccupied with the honour, dignity or interests
of the Order when he came over to England, though there
is no question that he travelled as an alchemist. It is
generally reported that he undertook many journeys—
doubtless, for the most part, over the wide field of his
fatherland ?—for the purpose of conferring with persons
of the same dedication, to extend his own and general
knowledge of Hermetic Art, and perhaps to acquire tracts,
like those of Norton and Cremer. The English visit had
unquestionably the same object in view. Now, it is out of
this pilgrim-motive that there has arisen the hypothesis
of his acquaintance with Robert Fludd. [have no wish to
cast ridicule on the notion and no intention to reject it.
There is a colourable presumption in its favour ; but from
the days of Bithle, with whom it seems to have originated, to

1 This is on the assumption that bibliographers are right in referring the
tract to 1614, and it is subject to whatever may follow from the fact that it
is dedicated to Sir William Paddy—1554-1634—who was four times President
of the College of Physicians, London. This dedication suggests, though it
does not presuppose, personal acquaintance. Paddy was of eminence in his
own country and was probably of repute in Germany, though he seems to
have written nothing, except some verses on the death of Queen Elizabeth
and the accession of James I.

2 This is the statement of Craven, but no authority is given. Mr. F.
Armitage in his Suyorr History or Freemasonry expands the story,
saying that “having become initiated by some adepts,” Maier travelled
over all Germany, looking for other members and collecting the laws
and customs of the Order “ from their confidential instruction.” This
is rubbish.

314

-- Page 346 --
A Great German Alchemist

the last maker of worthless Rosicrucian myth, and the last
compiler who follows antecedent statements blindly, it
has been expressed in terms of certitude, as if there were
records on the subject or even an extant correspondence
between the two notabilities. Maier did meet with like-
minded people in London, as at the period there is the
best reason to expect that he would, and he makes men-
tion of a few. But there is no mention of Robert Fludd.
It is true that the latter was then unknown to fame and
had published nothing. That this might account for
the omission is of course colourable, but the suggestion
is also a presumption against the alleged meeting, for
Maier was naturally in search of fellow-alchemists who
were in evidence as such, and there is not the least
reason to suppose that he had ever heard of the Kentish
mystic. The meeting therefore, if indeed it ever took
place, could have come about only by accident. On
the other hand, so far as Fludd is concerned, we have
found that not once in the course of his writings did he
quote or mention his supposed German familiar.

We have seen that Michael Maier returned to his
native land in 1616, and that one year later there appeared
his Lusus Szrrus,! which was not dedicated—as might
have been expected—to the Rosicrucian apologist Robert
Fludd, but to the Englishman Dr. Francis Anthony
among other people, being one who is in comparison
unknown.? It was not—as might have been expected

1 Lusus Serius, quo Hermes, sive Mercurius, Rex mundanorum omnium,
sub homine existentium, post longam disceptationem in Conctlio octovirali
habitam, homine rational: arbitro, judicatus et constitutus est. Francofurtum, 4
apud Luc. Jennis, 1617. The dedication is dated at Frankfurt, ipso ex
Anglia reditu, Pragam abituriens, anno 1616, Mense Septembri.

2 Francis Anthony was a Spagyric doctor of the period, with immeasurable
faith in the medicinal virtues of Aurum Potabile, on which he has left a tract
delineating his ‘way and method.” He had no other medical qualifications
and was continually embroiled in consequence with the College of Physicians,
who procured his imprisonment on one occasion at least.

315

-- Page 347 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
also—a Rosicrucian treatise, but a typical German work
of its period belonging to the lighter kind of Hermetic
motive. He must have found the Rosicrucian controversy
literally raging round him, but no allusion to the Brother-
hood occurs in its pages. Lusus Serius contributes
therefore nothing to our subject and yet a word about
it is desirable in this place, to indicate the particular
aspect of alchemy which had been occupying the mind of
Maier—presumably in England—at such a moment in
the Hermetic history of Western Europe, and in view
of the important place which he was destined to fill for
all too brief a period in the story of the Rosy Cross.
Those who are acquainted with alchemical literature
will know that there was a child’s work, boy’s work or
woman’s work from the standpoint of the adepts,
signifying something that was ex bypothest far more
easy than those more ordinary practices which connect
with the idea of transmutation. The ludus puerorum
and its analogues may not have proved simpler to follow
by the unaided student than were other courses in the
thorny path of Hermes, but they stand at their value
in alchemical bibliography and can be checked by those
who choose.1 I mention them because it may seem on
the surface of its title that Lusus Serius belongs to this
class ; but as a matter of fact it has nothing to do with
transmutation on any side of the practice. It is a

1 An old song provides the quotation which might appea r as an appro-
priate text for every authoritative discourse on alchemy :
Let us be open as the day,
Each mask does to the other say,
That he may deeper hide himself.
The Hermetic Masks reproached one another and taunted even one another
with their envy towards zealous seekers, but they practised it without excep-
tion, in the so-called Opus Mulierum, which may be compared with Ludus
Puerorum, as in tracts on the Sealed Palace. A tract entitled Lupus
Pusrorum will be found in Artis Aurirere quam Cuemiam VocanT
Votumen Duo, I, 5.
316

-- Page 348 --
A Great German Alchemist

chronicle concerning a fantastic Parliament of Beasts
and other creatures who lay before man—in the position
of an appointed arbiter—their respective claims to
pre-eminence over all sublunary things. Ruminating
animals are represented by Calf and Sheep; the Goose
answers for birds; the Oyster typifies the denizens of
the sea; the Bee does duty for winged insects; and the
Silk-worm for creeping things: it will be observed that
one and all are of conspicuous utility to man. Flax for
the same reason represents vegetable things and in fine
there is Mercury—as a veil presumably of the First
Matter of metals. The Judge is to choose a King from
among them, and he sums up after hearing their pleadings.
The claims of each are recognised, but Mercury is found
to be the miraculous splendour and light of all the world.
It receives therefore the Royal Crown as monarch of
visible things under the command of man. It is difficult
to see that a jeu d@esprit of this kind has any title to
existence,1 but it found appeal in two quarters, being
reprinted at Oppenheim in 1619 and translated into
English.?

1 The representations submitted by the various creatures are almost
exclusively concerned with their various ministries to mankind. There is a
long discourse on the part of Mercury, and though the crown is adjudged to
him he points out very honestly that it is gold which has the prerogative over
all other precious things, that nothing is so durable, nothing so strong in fire,
or of greater value and beauty. Asregards Mercury itself, (1) it isan antidote
against the plague; (2) in combination with gold or “any other body”
which is neither corrosive nor noxious, it is the best natural purgative ;
(3) it is valuable as a semi-metal, and (4) when mixed with certain salts it
becomes a poison. ‘There is not a word upon the Mercury of the Philo-
sophers, and although Francis Anthony is described as a “ jocund ” friend
I question whether the medicinal recipes included in the discourse could
have proved useful in his practice.

2 Lusus Serrus: or Serious Passe-Time. A Philosophical Discourse con-
cerning the Superiority of Creatures under Man, Written by Michael Maierus,
M.D., London (sic). Printed for Humphrey Moseley at the Prince’s Arms
in St. Paul’s Churchyard and Thomas Heath in Covent Garden, near the
Piazza, 1654. The translator signed himself J. de la Salle, ic. John Hall.

317

-- Page 349 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

The year 1617 was exceedingly prolific in respect of
published works under the name of Michael Maier
or at least written by him. Their chronology is of course
untraceable, but in addition to Lusus Serrus there were
Symsora Aure& Mensz@,!—already cited—Jocus Srverus?
and Examen Fucorum Pseupo-CHEMICORUM DETECTO-
ruM,® besides one contribution devoted exclusively to the
elucidation of the Rosy Cross. It is called Sitentrum
Post Cramorss * and is further described in its title as
(1) an answer to the calumnies and affronts poured out
by turbulent persons who desixe to be received into the
Fraternity of the R..C.. but have failed in obtaining
an answer; (2) a substantial demonstration why the
said Fraternity have hesitated to reveal themselves and
receive such people into their Society. The preface
refers to an opinion entertained by many that the Order

1 Maier is distinguished from his peers in German alchemy by an extra-
ordinary obscurity of style and by a passion for extensive titles, of which this
work offers an exaggerated instance.

2 Jocus Severus, hoc est Tribunale equum, quo noctua Regina Avium,
Phenice arbitro. .. pronunciatur. Francofurtum, 1617. It will be seen from
the title that this tract is concerned with a Parliament of Birds, with the
Phoenix as President and Judge. There is a debate after the manner of
Lusus Sertus, in which the Owl, Goose, Raven, Crane, Crow, Nightingale,
Swallow, Jackdaw, Sparrow-Hawk, Heron and Cuckoo take part. On
account of its traditional wisdom the Owl is made queen and is duly crowned.
In what way this jest deserves the title of severus I do not pretend to say, or
in what way it would appeal to all lovers of chemistry in Germany ; but it is
inscribed to these and more especially to that Order hereunto lying concealed
which the admirable Fama er Conressio have declared. This dedication
was written on the return journey from England to Bohemia. Archdeacon
Craven—following Bithle—suggests in an excellent bibliographical note
that the work itself was written in England.

3 Examen Fucorum Psrupo-CHyMIcoRUM DETECTORUM ¢t in gratiam
veritatis amantium succincte refutatorum ; autbore Micumie Matsro, etc.
Francofurtum, 1617.

4 Sizentium Post Cramorss, sex Tractatus Apologeticus quo cause
Revelationwum Fratrrum Roszm Crucis et silentit eorum demonstrantur.
Francofurtum, 1617. Lenglet du Fresnoy, in his valuable Bibliography of
Alchemy, calls it trés curieux etrecherchés des Amateurs.

318

-- Page 350 --
A Great Ger

has disseminated innumera
simultaneously in differen
after the manner that swi
supposed in the space of
Tablets of the Laws in o
They have been stigmatise
mode of Autolycus, and ;
brood.? Maier regards s
rash but wicked and affirn
of personal knowledge—th:
wise act in opposition to t:
mony of ancient philosopl
agreement with their prog
tion there follows the curi
a case ocular demonstratic
mere rumour. It has no
context, nor with that wh
to this, anyone who denie
crucians offer concerning 1
sistent—deny everything, li
Academics. “In my opini
published the Fama and
duty and are therefore not
—about whom, however, t
little, but refer them to th

1 An allusion to the statement i
sequel were “sent forth in five lan;
tation, p. 137.

2 Tt will be remembered that thes
his autobiography when alluding to |

3 The alchemist’s notion of evide:
in Tue Mysteries or Upotpxo, w
battlements by which the ghost app
concerning the apparition she fai
remained sceptical.

4 Recommending the sceptics to
the Rosy Cross.

man Alchemist

ble delusive writings almost
t parts of Europe +—much
ft-footed Thales of old was
three days to have erected
ne hundred cities of Crete.
d also as pilferers, after the
is begetters of a monstrous
uch judgment as not only
ys—as if with the authority
it the Fraternity does in no
‘uth or morality. The testi-
iy and of natural law is in
ramme, after which declara-
ous suggestion that in such
nm is to be preferred before
relation with the antecedent
ich comes after. According
s the testimony which Rosi-
themselves must—to be con-
ke the Pyrrhonists and New
on,” says Maier, “those who
Conressto have done their
to be blamed by rash critics
hey concern themselves very
eir Master. They prefer to

1 the Fama that this manifesto and its
xuages ”’—on which see text and anno-

e are the very words used by Andree in
Nurrie CHYMIce.

ice is precisely like that of Emily’s maid
hen having shewn the cannon on the
eared as so much ocular demonstration
led to understand why her mistress

the devil, not to the Hidden Master of

19

-- Page 351 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
exhaust calumny by silence rather than to increase it
by writing further.”! Then as if drawing himself up
suddenly, lest he should be accused of being acquainted
with the Brethren “as to their persons,”’ the apologist
concludes his preface with these qualifying words:
‘“* Meanwhile, I do not consider this Society stands in
need of my insignificant patronage and apology, while
I myself expect nothing from its members but goodwill,
which they as honest and upright persons extend
willingly to all who are upright and pious. Yet I could
not omit to defend the truth therein, so at least that
they should not be more oppressed by the ill-favour
and envy of the ignorant than exonerated by the up-
rightness of intelligent and good-hearted persons.”

We can take our choice between two ways of regarding
this preliminary discourse, either as an ex parte argument
on the part of one whose congenital credulity has been
stimulated by desire to recommend himself in the eyes
of an Order which he believes in on its own warrants
and desires to be received therein or as a defence issued
from within the occult circle,? which—while advancing
what it can on its own behalf—is determined to remain
anonymous and requires its champion to dissemble.
The difficulty about the second view is in the text itself
and in the fact that so many declared aspirants followed
strictly analogous ways to earn a title of admission. Let
us see, however, what light—if indeed any—can be derived
from a brief analysis of the work itself.

The alchemist sets out with an intention of proving

1 We have seen, however, that there were other official documents—
whether real or simulated.

2 It seems certain, however, that in 1617 Maier wrote as one defending
the Society from outside its ranks, but we shall see that in 1618 the testimony
of Tuemis AuREA appears to come from within. Jam reminded that among
rumours current at and about the period there was that reported by Garasse,
according to which Maier was Secretary of the Rosicrucian Brotherhood.

320

-- Page 352 --
A Great German Alchemist
various points but offers in reality only long and mostly
arbitrary argumentations to the following effect :
(1) That the majority of Nature’s secrets are still
hidden. (2) That these secrets are exactly such as they
are declared to be in the Conrsssio FRATERNITATIS
R..C... (3) That the Universal Medicine is comprised
among them, and this is the highest good—after the
knowledge of God. (4) That the said Glorious Medicine
is found in Nature. (5) That there have been Philo-
sophical Orders and Fraternities among other nations
and peoples in ancient times; that these also studied
the secrets of Nature and in particular of this Medicine
with the highest diligence ; that they transmitted it to
successors through the centuries, choosing them from
among other philosophers. (6) That the existence of
such a Society at the present time is not therefore
incredible, especially when it is manifested by written
and published works.1 (7) That, according to its own
Confession, the Society has existed already for a consider-
able number of years, watching over the glory of God
and the welfare of men, in order to manifest ultimately,
which it has now done. (8) That this manifestation could
and ought to take place only through the Fama and
Conress1o—a fact which has come to pass.?. (9) That
these publications contain nothing which is contrary to

1 Maier not realising that printed and published works might proclaim
a Society which had no existence outside them.

2 I do not cite the arguments on which this contention is based: they
are available to those who are concerned—if any—at the present day. The
supposition is that the Fama is true historically and that the Conressto
represents the faith of the Brotherhood. Both are relevant therefore to the
act of manifestation, as piéces justificatives. The will to believe was
obviously much too predominant in Michael Maier for him to see that there
was another point from which it might be possible to approach the subject,
namely, that statements in anonymous documents which offer no evidence

:and cannot be checked otherwise can at most be left only as open questions
and are certainly not justified by the appeal to an alleged possibility of things,
¥ 321

-- Page 353 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

the nature, rationality, experience or possibility of
anything. (10) That for cogent reasons many are called
by this Society but few are chosen. (11) That the god
Harpocrates and the Sphinx were placed upon Egyptian
altars to signify silence, that the Pythagoreans had to
keep silence for five years and that the Fraternity must
do likewise, lest the secrets of Nature should be revealed
to the unworthy. (12) That the Order was actuated by
good reasons when it resolved on manifestation up to
a certain point and on ascertaining the judgment of the
world, while it is on grounds not less solid that it has
again decided on concealment for a given space.! (13)
That the manifestation by means of the Fama and
Conressio was received variously, some denying the
existence of such an institution as the Order. (14) That
certain people are opposed to the Order owing to their
ignorance of chemistry. (15) That others disapprove
owing to self-esteem and vanity. (16) That there are
those who accuse it of Necromancy, Sorcery and such
evil practices. (17) That there are yet others who, per-
ceiving that they are not accounted worthy by an Order
so highly exalted, have given up their hope concerning
it and impeach it in all ways. (18) That there are many
who approach the Society by means of letters, asking to
be received therein, to be healed of their sicknesses, or
to be visited in a certain place and answered according
to their desires, but when they fail to succeed herein
they find a refuge in slander. (19) That impostors have
shielded themselves under the cover of this Order and
have cheated the foolish of their money, which persons
shall be brought to condign punishment.? (20) That

1 Itis to be noted that this statement was made in 1617, after the publica-
tion of the three chief manifestoes of the Rosy Cross and that all subsequent
official documents—treal or supposed—are different in tone and nature.

* The statement, which may be accepted as one of fact, is not without

322

-- Page 354 --
A Great German Alchemist
yet others have resorted to other evil practices for their
own profit. (21) That these facts have been turned to
the prejudice of the Society, whereas it is much to be
desired that such judges should seek to understand it
better, because it is entitled to all honour, desiring as it
does only the general good.

The kind of validity which may be credited to these
representations does not need to be recited: they are
a testimony to the writer’s sincerity and his personal
a priori belief in the actuality and honesty of the Order,
because its claims are, from his standpoint, without
offence to possibility. It is probably on these considera-
tions rather than on any first-hand knowledge that
Maier represents the Order exhibiting the Rose as
something far off in respect of attainment, while the
Cross is offered to Candidates. He held also that the
Masters desired rather than expected a reformation
of the world and of science. Meanwhile, the thera-
peutics which was their chief study had three objects
in view, being body, soul and spirit. In other words,
they healed on all the planes, as those who had the free-
dom of all, holding the keys of life by derivation from
that Source which Itself is Life of life. Thus equipped
and warranted, they went about doing good to others
in humility and the abnegation of self, pursuing an honest
and moderate mean, inconspicuous by their clothing
and frugal in their food. It is true that they were dis-
tinguished from the crowd, but this was by veneration
of God and by hatred of evil things.

Another text to which I have referred previously was
consequence in the early history of the subject. The “‘ rogues and runa-
gates ” pilloried in the Fama would of course bring grist to their mills and at the
the same time avenge themselves by claiming that they belonged to the
Order. But while individuals went to work in this manner it is probable
also that there were cases of grouped imposture,

323

-- Page 355 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

a much more considerable and ambitious work entitled
Sympota Aure® MeEns#,} in which—as I believe, for
the first time—the Brotherhood is referred to as a College
of German Philosophers R..C.... The denomination was
perpetuated by occasional use among later German
writers and in the nineteenth century was remitted from
one to another by various imitative Societies, some of
which still maintain it. According to Maier, the
Rosicrucian establishment was preceded by a College
of Gymnosophists among the Ethiopians, a College of
Magi among Persians, a College of Brahmins in India.
Of such is the genealogy of the Order, though according
to a certain spiritual descent, for there is no suggestion
of lineal succession, as if one derived from another. I
question whether German occultists of the seventeenth
century followed any quest of origins in this direction.
A long preface to the work explains that the Golden
Table is that at which Triumphs were celebrated among
the Romans, but Maier is concerned with the victory of
Chymia, ‘‘ than which there is nothing more sublime.”
The Rosicrucian references, which are comparatively
few, considering the bulk of the text, may be thus col-
lected together.

(1) As against modern gratuitous inventions which
represent Michael Maier carrying the Rosy Cross in his
pocket to England and initiating Robert Fludd in Coleman
Street or Bearsted, he states in his sub-section entitled
Collegium Philosophorum Germanorum de R-.C.. that
the report of it reached him when he was at work in

1 The work extends to seven hundred quarto pages, with copper-plates
by Rudolph de Bry. It appeared at Frankfurt apud Lucam Fennis. It is
impossible to quote the entire title, but a shortened form begins : SymMBoLa
Avurem Mens XII Nationum, hoc est Heroum XII Selectorum Artis Chimica,
usu, sapientia et autoritate, parium augmenta, quibus adversarius jam tot annos
ipsi, tam vitiosis argumentis, quam argutis convitiis, injuriam atrocissimam
inferens, confunditur et exarmatur, etc. etc. 1617,

324

-- Page 356 --
A Great German Alchemist

England on the business of Alchemy—meaning probably
that he was in search of fellow-students—and that he
regarded it doubtfully.t (2) He mentions a certain
prophet, said to be of the number of the wise, who had
sprung up in the vicinity of Morocco and Fez and whose
wonderful innovations were credited to the College.
This was in 1613. (3) His return to Germany and con-
sequent first-hand acquaintance with the subject of
debate must have brought him in a short time to a
different point of view, for his conclusion regarding the
Fama is: Magna sane res est. (4) It seems evident,
however, that he is still speaking as one who is outside.
(5) In the next sub-section, which is called Dubia habita
a quibusdam de Collegio Hermetico nostri temporis
celeberrimo, he recites and explains away as he can certain
contradictions in the text of Fama and Cownressro.
There are eight of these difficulties in all, but it will be
sufficient to mention three: (2) C..R..C.. is represented
as falling sick at Damascus and afterwards being carried
thereto; but Maier fails to recognise the distinction
between that city and the hidden place called Damcar
in the Fama: it may be added that German printers
fell into similar confusion. The point is notable because
it indicates that the apologist in chief of the Order in
its own country was not a member three full years after
the publication of its memorials began. (5) Paracelsus
is represented as reading the Rosicrucian Boox M..
before he was born, but this misreads the Fama, on the
hypothesis of which all the documents treasured by the
early Brethren were in existence early in the fifteenth

1 T give the Latin passage in full: Fama illa dicte Fraternitatis, que hic
in plurimorum auribus oreque jampridem perstrepuit, adque exteras oras
circum circa vagata latissimas regiones pervolavit, miht quoque tum in Anglia
agenti, reique Chemice umice invigilanti, obscuris quibusdam rumusculis,
incredibilibus ipsaque veritate longe majoribus insonuit, cui fidem, pro referentis
fide, dubiam prima vice adbibut.

325

-- Page 357 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
century and could have been read by Paracelsus, sup-
posing that he had access thereto. (¢) A VocaBuLARIUM
of Paracelsus is said to have been found in the tomb
of C..R..C.., but this is impossible, as the Sage of
Hohenheim was not in existence when the Mystic Vault
was sealed up for a period of one hundred and twenty
years.

In the next sub-section Maier presents various metrical
enigmas on the part of Apollo and the Nine Muses
concerning the College of Philosophers and their Hidden
House—eorumque locus—but it need only be said concern-
ing them that their business is to darken counsel. It is
obvious that the physician of Emperor Rudolph ITI was
not in a position to disclose that with which only the
initiates were acquainted. After these barren in-
genuities there follows a summary history of Frater
C..R..C.., reproduced from the Fama to determine
some points of chronology, as for example that the
Master died in 1484 at the age of one hundred and six
years, whence it would follow that the one hundred and
twenty years during which his tomb must be concealed
ended in 1604. ‘The successive circles into which the
Order was divided by the effluxion of time are set out
in the last place and it will be seen in the following
tabulation that they are at variance with the original
lists.

Fratres Primi Orpinis er Sacuni: (1) Fr.o.C..R-.,
Author et Inceptor, (2) Fre.Ge.Ve. (3) Fron A-.
(4) Frs.1..0.., who was the first to die in England.
(5) Fre.R.oiC.., patris ejus filius. (6) Fr-.Be. (7)
Fr..G.e.Ge. (8) FroP..D-. Fratres SECUNDI

1 There was a tradition that Paracelsus had visited the East and had
drunk at its fountsof wisdom. The suggestion of the Fama might be there-
fore that he also visited Damcar and knew something of its archives; but
the real meaning is that Liber M.*. contained the Principles of Nature,
which Paracelsus also had mastered.

326

-- Page 358 --
A Great German Alchemist

Orpvinis ET Scuti: (1) Fr..C..H.., electione caput
Societatis. (2) Frs.R.-.C.. Junior, heres $. Spiritus,
Successor Fr..C-.R.., cum Christo triumphantis. (3)
Fre.M..P. (4) Fr-.P-.A.., pictor, architectus, mathe-
maticus. ($) Fra-.Bs.M.. (6) Fra..P..1.., Cabalista
(7) Fre.Co (8) Fr.Ae. successit ipst P.D-., et
cum multis vixit tertii Ordinis. Frarres Tertii OrpINIs
ET S@cutr: (1), (2), (3) Tertius in Ordine, qui Wetz-
lari@a, A. C. 1615, se fratrem ore est confessus et multis
modis demonstravit. (4), (5), (6), (7) Be-M..1-., gua
Hagenose scripsit quedam impressa, A. 1614, Sept. 22.
(8) N..N.., bonus architectus; casu aperuit fornicem
sepulchri Fr-.Re.C.., anno Christo 1604, aut circiter.

The Rosicrucian subject was taken more seriously in
hand when Maier published his Tuemis Aurea! in the
following year, the Golden Rule in question being the
Laws of the Fraternity, which are said to have been
discovered in the tomb of Christian Rosy Cross, inscribed
in a golden book, though the traditional history of Fama
FRATERNITATIS does not favour the invention. ‘They
are those with which we are acquainted and not, as
might have been expected, a new catalogue or enumera-
tion. It follows that Turemis Aurea, though in its
dimensions a considerable tract, is merely an exposition
and defence of six very simple rules which stand at their
individual value and by no means call for comment,
much less at inordinate length. It is explained that the
senary is a perfect number, free from the confusion which

1 Tuemis Aurea, hoc est, de Legibus FrarernitatisR,.C.,. Tractatus.,.
Authore Micu, Maizro. Francofurti, typis Nic. Horrmann, sumpt. Luca
Jennis. 1618. The addendum to the title affirms that the said Laws are
shewn in the text to be “in conformity with the truth of their object and
contribute to public and private utility.” A second edition was called for
in the same year and also a German version. Finally, an English translation
appeared in 1656 and was dedicated to Elias Ashmole as “ the only philoso-
pher in the present age.”

327

-- Page 359 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
might follow from greater magnitudes and simple to
this extent, like the great laws of Nature, for which
reason the adepts or epopts of the Order adopted six
rules. It cannot be said otherwise that the Apologia of
Maier itself makes for simplicity. We know that accord-
ing to the Third Law of the Fama all Brethren were
required to be present at the House of the Holy Spirit
on a certain Dies C,1 ‘* or write the cause of absence.”
The commentary offered hereon certifies in the first place
that “ we are unable to specify the Houses in which they
meet ” and thereafter proceeds thus: ‘“‘I beheld on
a day the Olympian Towers shining by a certain stream
and famous city, which we have consecrated by the
Name of the Holy Spirit. I speak of Helicon—or
double-peaked Parnassus—whereon the steed Pegasus
opened a fountain of perennial water, flowing unto this
day. Therein Diana bathes; therewith are associated
Venus as a waiting-maid and Saturn as a patient client.”
We know that the House of the Spirit is a House of
Holy Inspiration and Divine Rapture; we know also
—or some of us—that there is a Helicon which is not
of this world and a Parnassus which is not in any earthly
Greece ; and it may be that the Brethren of the Rosy
Cross, as conceived if not known by Maier, observed
the High Festival of Dies C-. in the Hidden Church of
Eckartshausen ; yet I cannot think that the direction
thus given is of the kind which those who run may read,
nor do the alchemical references make for understanding,
even if the Copper and Lead of the Wise assist at those
ceremonies in the course of which Adept-Hermetists
testify that they have seen Diana unveiled. Maier is,

1 In the opinion of M. Sédir the formula Dies C signified the “ Day of
the Cross,” presumably the Invention of the Holy Cross, but he does not
say why, and it is unlikely that such a purely Roman Festival would have
been countenanced. by the Lutheran Fama. Op. cit., p. 69.

328

-- Page 360 --
A Great German Alchemist
however, of another opinion and adds: ‘‘ These are
words which will say too much to those who understand,
but to the inexpert little or nothing.”

The heads of the consideration! otherwise may be
summarised briefly thus?: (1) The Rosicrucians are
servants of the King of kings. (2) Religion is held by
them at a higher value than is anything in the whole
world. (3) In the Boox M.., as in a glass and clearly,
they behold the anatomy and idea of the whole universe.
(4) Their Medicine is comparable to the marrow of the
great world, but also to that fire of Prometheus which he
is fabled to have stolen from the sun. (5) It is brought
to perfection by the help of a fourfold heat. (6) It is
to be understood, however, that the Brethren make use
only of lawful and natural remedies. (7) It is perhaps
in this sense that they are certified as dedicated only to
the study of Natural Magic. (8) With further reference
to the Boox M.. it is affirmed to comprehend “ the
perfection of all arts,’’ beginning with the Heavens—
probably in an astrological sense—and coming down to
the inferior sciences. (9) As against current exaggera-
tions and enthusiasms on the part of postulants and
defenders, the disposition of Maier throughout is to
paint his portrait of the Brotherhood in sober terms.
(10) It is said that they are mortals only and will therefore
cease to be, meaning of course that they will die in the
physical sense when their time comes. (11) As custodians
of their Mysteries they are secret, true in their dealings,
and—for the rest—frugal, temperate and laborious.
(12) They are anxious for the reservation of their hidden

1] should mention that Tumis Aurea has a preface addressed to the
Brotherhood and to a certain S. P. D., described as Theod. Verax., Theophil.
Celnatus.

2 It will be observed that the thesis throughout is written as if by one
who is initiated and is speaking in the name of his Brethren.

329

-- Page 361 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
knowledge to those whom God may call. (13) Its un-
broken transmission is therefore an important point.
(14) They have always “ had one among them as a Head
and Ruler, unto whom all are obedient.” + (15) In this
manner there is no confusion among them, and from one
to another their secrets are handed on, after the manner
of ancient knowledge. (16) So also they follow the
custom of Colleges in past ages, which were composed
of “the pick of the most able, and these were few.”
(17) It is claimed finally that the Order has one secret
of “incredible virtue,” and by means thereof they
can cause piety, justice and truth to predominate in
any person who is brought under their influence, sup-
pressing the contrary vices. It will be observed that
several of these testimonies appear to come from within
the secret circle.

‘Tuemis Avrea is the last publication in which Michael
Maier espoused the cause of the Rosy Cross to the exclusion
of all else, and he died—as we have seen—in 1622.7 His
Verum Inventum of 1619—otherwise Munera GerMANIE
—could scarcely do otherwise than include the Order
among the Fatherland’s gifts to the world, but it deals
with such inventions as printing and other discoveries
innumerable, not to speak of the religion of reform.
Seprimana Purtosopuica, 1620, is described as Golden

1 Tt would follow that the Order was governed by an Imperator from
the beginning, though he may not have been distinguished by this title,
which is characteristic of a later period.

2 A manuscript of Michael Maier is preserved in the University of
Leipsic and is mentioned by Fessler in his Hisrory or Freemasonry. ‘There
is also an account of Yarker, published in Tue Knepn, Vol. IV, August 3,
1884. As usual, this is a tissue of inextricable reveries, reproducing matter
from Tue Rosicructan Unvertep of Magister Pianco, concerning the year
1570, when the Old Magical Brethren are said to have been re-established as
Brethren of the Rose-Cross of Gold. Pianco’s story is confused, moreover,
with the history of the. German Steinmetzen and their Head-Lodge at
Strasbourg. The testimony of Magister Pianco will be reviewed in my
sixteenth chapter.

330

-- Page 363 --
A Great German Alchemist

Enigmas on the whole system of Nature. It is
in the form of Dialogues between Solomon King of
Israel, Hiram King of Tyre and the Queen of Sheba,
who is characterised, however, as Saba, Queen of Arabia.
They embrace the whole scheme of the cosmos, from the
firmament and the four elements to fossils beneath the
earth. The animate creation is represented by vegetables,
animals and 11an. It happens that the Rose is described,
but Maier’s testimony concerning it has been quoted
in my fourth chapter, and it remains only to note that
the obvious opportunity to mention the Brotherhood of
the Rosy Cross seems missed on purpose, possibly because
Maier had a counter-explanation of the letters R..C~..
In a posthumous tract, published long after his death,
Scrutinium CuyMicum, 1687, it is said (Emblema XVII)
that the Rosartum of Arnoldus de Villanova was the
progenitor of Maier’s Rosicrucian writings. It is difficult
to understand how, because the latter are apologetic
and polemical, while the former contains a presentation
of the author’s theory and practice of Alchemy. But
the meaning may be that as Maier valued the Rosarium,
Rosary, or Rose-Garden of Arnold, so he was drawn to
the Rose-Cross of the Order before he questioned the
correctness of this denomination.?

We are concerned more directly with another post-
humous work which appeared at Frankfurt in 1624 and
is entitled Unyssrs,? alternatively, Wisdom or Under-
standing, regarded as a certain ray of celestial beatitude,

1 Norton’s Orpinaz or Aucuemy and Cremer’s TESTAMENT, two precious
English MS8S. obtained by him in his travels were translated by Maier into
Latin and published, together with the Twerve Keys of Basil Valentine,
under the title of Trrpus Aureus at Frankfurt in 1618.

2 The text occupies 31 pp. only in a duodecimo book. Ulysses is
regarded as a symbol of absolute human wisdom. Maier affirms: (1) that
only the wise are blessed, (2) that the unhappy are those who are foolish—
intellectus dextere non utens. According to one of the aphorisms, Diadema
coronat Regis exterius, et Sapientia interius,

331

-- Page 364 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

by the help of which those who are shipwrecked as
regards benefits of body and fortune can retire on their
oars into the harbour of meditation and patience. It
will be seen that it is an exhortation of a moral and
spiritual kind, shewing that other side of the author’s
dedications to which I have referred previously. It is
not of great importance otherwise and there is no space
for its analysis. On the other hand, a singular interest
attaches to certain additamenta, bein two tracts which
follow in the same volume, and the prefatory remarks
of its editor, who appears to have been an intimate
personal friend.t_ I have quoted the latter at the begin-
ning of this chapter, as regards the Christian piety of
Maier. He makes two further statements concerning
him: (1) that he did not know whether the famous
alchemist who had defended the Brothers R..C.. ever
became a member of that Fraternity; but however
this might be (z) that he was assuredly integrated in the
Brotherhood of the Kingdom of Christ and in the Order
of the Christian Religion. A so-called appendix, occupy-
ing the bulk of the volume, is specified as containing
tracts on the Fraternity of the Rosy Cross. These are
four in number. The first is entitled CoLttoguium
Ruopostavroticum, and was published originally in
German, 1621.? It is described as a colloquy between three
persons on the subject of the Rosicrucian Brotherhood, as
made known by the Fama et Conrsssio.? Tyrosophus, the

1 He describes Maier as Amicus et Favitor meus honorandus, and says that
he paid the debt of Nature at Magdeburg in 1622, in tempore estiva. The
tract Unysses was received by its editor from Maier himself.

2 Cottoguim Ruoposrauroticum Irium Personarum, per Famam et
Confesstonem quodammodo revelatum, de FRATERNITATE R. C. 1621, sine loco.

3 The writings of Maier are quoted, and so also are Schweighardt, Irenzus
Agnostus, Menapius, the Propromus and TinrinnasuLus. ‘There are
allusions, moreover, to Gutmann and Weigel. One subject of debate is the
relation of MotrHerus WeTzuari@, qui a viro quodam qui anno 1615 illic
transterat, testatus est quod non solummodo sese Rosem Crucis FraTREM

332

-- Page 365 --
A Great German Alchemist

third of these, makes reference to Michael Maier and
speculates whether his labour of love was barren to
himself of fruit. There is nothing else to our purpose.
This tract bears the date of February 13 in the year
mentioned. In the second and more important Benedict
Hilarion came forward with an Ecuo Cottoquir Ruopo-
STAUROTICI! in German, claiming that his answer was
given by command of the Superiors, otherwise the
Masters of the Rosy Cross. It is a pamphlet of con-
siderable interest, more especially in respect of two
statements addressed to Tyrosophus of the Colloquy :
(1) He is assured that Maier should not work to no
purpose in his notable defence of the Order, which can
carry one meaning only, and indeed it is intimated
to all intents and purposes that he would be brought
ultimately within the circle.? (2) It is testified further
professus futsset, sed etiam multifaria eruditione, omnisque generis rerum
Scientia, verbis et operibus ita sese tum temporis exhibuisset, ut ejus singuli
mirati fuerint.

1 The tract is dated Mense Martis, anno 1622, so that Maier was still
alive. That which it registers concerning him is actually a record of
intention. I quote from the Latin edition. Quemadmodum etiam Dominus
MicwaeL Materus, tamquam vir clarisstmus, illud ipsum scribendo egregie
prestitit, velutt ejus ret luculentum prebent testimonium, tpsius SILENTIUM
post Cramores, THemis Aurea, Verum Inventum, SymspoLtum AUREE
Mensa, etc.; qu@ seripta etiam a Domino Authore ipso, non frustra scripta
esse debent, sed illum, haud immerito, ante mortem ipsius, tam ingentibus
honorartis, quam non minus singularium mysteriorum communicatione, beabimus.

2 There is indeed 2 very general promise of reception, and it seems to
stand upon the threshold. Cum enim nobis omnium actiones hinc inde satis
Superque not@ sint, tccirco nuperrimo tempore iterum non contemnendam
partem bonorum, bene affectionatorum moderatorumque hominum in Fraterni-
tatem nostram reciprendt, eosdemque nostre tam spiritualis, quam secularis a
divina bonitate accepte sapientie participes reddendi elegimus. Benedict
Hilarion proceeds next to enumerate pious and steadfast theologians, proved
Christians, lawyers, doctors, philosophers, poets and other lovers of liberal
arts. He gives even the initials of alleged personalities. There is an allusion
also to the number of appeals put forward in the course of the years:
A publicatione Famm nostre insuper buc usque non pauci, tam docti, quam
indoctt homines nos tentarunt, an videlicet nos commovere possint, ut in
Fraternitatem nostram reciperentur.

333

-- Page 366 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
that the possibility of their reception is still held out
to others in a due time to come.!

Benedict Hilarion is a new name and does not recur
in the debate, which was now practically at an end. It
ought to be unnecessary to indicate, even in those places
of folly which are called occult circles, that his statement,
had it been put in much more positive terms, would
not constitute evidence and leaves everything doubtful as
it stands. But if it proves nothing I think that the fact
of its existence is more difficult to explain on the ground
of lying fable than on the supposition that there was
something behind it. We must remember that seven
long years had worn themselves slowly out since the
strife of words began: in the nature of things it would
have been exhausted much earlier had there been nothing
to support it but its own verbose extravagance, stimulated
only by occasional contributions on behalf of the alleged
Order itself. I feel certain that the report of an Order
was being heard of from time to time outside documents,
that a general feeling was abroad concerning something
which was alive in the world, that the debate was sus-
tained thus and could not have been otherwise. The
people who issued the first manifestoes may have gone
about their ways in other directions: on this question
it is impossible to hold a decisive opinion for or against ;
but, if they had so scattered, something sprang up in
their place, and the rumour of it was current in Germany.
It may have been framed seriously on the plan outlined
in the early memorials—we cannot tell: it may have

1 The text of the Latin edition covers 20 pp. It is addressed more
especially to Tyrosophus as Christiano innominato et omnium artium amatori
verissimo, and affirms that the Cortoquium nobis Collegio Ordinis Rost&
Crucis satis mature tempore acceperimus. One of its mottoes is a promise of
a good time in prospect—presumably for worthy aspirants :

Post pluvia formosa dies, post nubila Phebus,
Post lacrymas tandem celica hora venit.
334

-- Page 367 --
A Great German Alchemist

been rank imposture—again, we do not know; but that
there was something which people could join who had
a lucky star in their heaven I shall always think. Into
this something Maier may have been brought ere he
died—-in which case the intention expressed by Ecxo
Corto wm connoted a hidden fact accomplished—and
if it lied to him in respect of claims and antecedents
there is no question that he would have believed. ‘That
he founded anything on his own part which by intent and
otherwise was fraudulent I want no evidence to dis-
believe otherwise than is furnished by the man himself
and his writings. While on the tentative hypothesis
here outlined it may seem as easy to suppose that the
little loosely interlinked circle which issued the Fama
continued in secret activity, [ feel this explanation pre-
carious. If Benedict Hilarion writing mandato Superiorum
represented a Society in fact under the Rosicrucian
name, it had undergone a new birth in time, of which
there are indications otherwise. The virulent sectarian
spirit in respect of religious reform is absent from Ecuo
Cottoquir; the traditional history of the Order and
its founder has faded into the background ; there is no
offering of gold to princes; there is a spirit of theo-
sophical religion on a reasonably broad basis. It is by
no means the later mind of Robert Fludd testifying
to the spirit and the truth of a regenerated Rosy Cross ;
but on a lower level it is like a herald of that mind to
come.

At the end of Ecuo Coxttoguir there are certain
Declaratory Canons, specified as Ergon et Parergon
F.-.R..C.., otherwise a Kabalistic Chart from the
Terrestrial Olympus, setting forth after what manner
Nature, whose mastery is concealed chiefly in the earth,
follows in the steps of her Creator, tingeing and trans-
muting metals. ‘The Canons establish (1) that from the

335

-- Page 368 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
Eternal there was the Father God, without beginning or
end, an incorruptible fire, an everlasting light, filled
with spirit and eternal splendour; (2) that this Spirit
in God is stronger than His body because it is vivified
by fire; (3) that the soul of the Creator dwells in this
life of fire; (4) that the said Spirit in Divinity, united
in itself and fortified, brings forth a third, to wit, a soul
which hath dwelt in the Spirit from eternity, being the
very Word; (5) that in and by the Word the Spirit is
fire; (6) that this Spirit of fire abides without end by
the fire of love in God; (7) that it is the Divine all-
powerful Spirit which spake and all things were made,
even by the power of the Word; (8) that the Spirit
which moved upon the waters was in the Word ; (9) that
the eternal Wisdom and Word of the Father God, Spirit
and Soul of God, invisibly and incomprehensibly perfected
all things initself ; (10) that for the manifestation of the
most high mysteries of the Fire and Spirit of God in
God, the Fire and Spirit of God descended and came
forth in bodily form, and commanded that the Fire
and Spirit within it should be poured forth therefrom
into a virginal human body ; (11) that the hidden should
be manifested thereby ; (12) that the Fire and Spirit
of God from God should be glorified throughout all
Nature ; (13) that by means of the Spirit moving upon
the waters the Creator divided His eternal creative fire
from the outward bodies of created things; and (14)
that such division being made in the mind of the Creator,
God ordained the four elements.

The first cosmic epoch being thus completed, the
recital goes on to affirm (1) that the Fire and Spirit of
the Creator poured out on the stars and firmament ;
(2) that the Most Holy and Blessed Essence of the Creator
was hidden in each and all of these, as Soul is hidden
in Spirit ; (3) that it went forth afterwards through all

336

-- Page 369 --
A Great German Alchemist

its marvels of created things, as through bodies ; (4) that
hence also the divine cognition of things was sealed upon
the inward side of that which was created; (5) that
inferiors were thus drawn to superiors; (6) that from
this divine soul bodies imbued by its law proceeded and
were multiplied; (7) that the Fire, Spirit or Divine
Essence being provided by the Creator’s blessing and
the.thing thus confected, it was developed as a beautiful,
pure and pellucid body, and the Creator fumigated
that which was pure, pellucid and beautiful out of earth,
and drew the same from the hiddenness and made it
manifest by forming an image in His own likeness,
namely, man, whom he built up out of the quintessence
of Olympian earth, which consists in spirit and soul
through the Spirit and Soul of the Creator, which in
earth is most brilliant Salt, Sulphur and Mercury.

The alchemical thesis follows and is to this effect:
(1) that metals and the other minerals are found only in
mountains and under earth of Salt, Sulphur and Mercury;
(2) that this earth is impregnated by Nature with mineral
water ; (3) that whilst the metals grow undisturbed the
root of all metals comes forth ; (4) that this is the First
Matter of all the wise, whom God hath made glad by
knowledge of the most High Mastery of Nature; (5) that
the virtue of this Nature is in the body, that is, in Salt,
which Salt or the body maintains the Sulphur and Mercury,
otherwise spirit and soul with itself ; (6) that the matter
of Highest Mastery is found in fire and water or in
impregnated water, which water is not moist and does
not wet the fingers; (7) that all things are one thing only ;
(8) that this water cannot abide without earth, which
earth nourishes fire and air by the active Spirit of the
Creator ; (g) that there is a perpetual intercourse of the
Divine Essence with created bodies; (10) that the
Divine Essence is manifested through fire and water,

Zz 337

-- Page 370 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
as through Spirit and Soul; (11) that created things are
brought forth and manifested by earth and water, as
through bodies ; (12) that herein lies the sacrament and
mystery of the correspondence between the philosophical
work of highest science and the harmony of the Sacro-
saintly Divine Trinity, even as Ergon with Parergon.
Glory unto God alone.

I have quoted these Canons in full as a specimen of
affirmed Rosicrucian doctrine and theory during the
first decade which followed the Fama Fraternitatis.
Their arrangement has been simplified as far as possible
for the sake of the general reader, while recognising that
a process of tabulation will not make them intelligible.
I can say only concerning them that they seek to illustrate
and justify the dream of metallic transmutation by
establishing its theosophical correspondences. It may
be observed in this connection that the seventh paragraph
in the alchemical thesis is an arbitrary introduction
without reference to what precedes or comes after, and
yet it provides a keynote of the whole intention. The
words in the Latin are: Omnia sunt res una, and their
analogies are recurrent in Hermetic literature, the most
notable being: Est una sola res. The last as it stands,
apart from any context, is an unconditional affirmation
of the doctrine of unity—namely, that God is All,
rather even than All in all. I have cited it, however,
because as such it is to be distinguished from the De-
claratory Canons. To say that Omnia sunt res una is
very like saying Est una sola res, but the sentences are
not synonymous ; the one is the doctrine of multiplicity
becoming unity, while the other denies multiplicity.
Moreover, as it seems to me, the res una of the Canon
signifies an unity of concordance rather than oneness of
essence, and this is illustrated throughout the text. I do
not remember that a correspondence has been established

338

-- Page 372 --
CHAPTER XII
LATER CONTINENTAL HISTORY
Tue testimony of Robert Fludd brings the literary
history of the Rosy Cross in England to the year 1629
and closes its first period. So far as records are concerned,
it is the story of a single individual and of that which
he was able to find in his glass of vision. With the excep-
tion of Mosaicat Puitosopuy, which does not belong
to our subject unless in that almost spectral sense which
might be suggested by far-off analogies with the theosophy
of gidius Gutmann—a writer favoured by early
memorials or traditional concerns of the Brotherhood—
and with the exception of Parson Foster’s Sponcz,
which is of no consequence or interest from any stand-
point whatever, all writings of Fludd—his Rosicrucian
apologies included—were published abroad, and there
is no direct evidence forthcoming that they created any
concern or had a circulation to speak of in England.
Dr. Craven has given us a careful summary account of
Hutchinson and his system and has shewn us that he was
to all appearance unacquainted with his predecessor of
a few years back, yet he was perhaps the most likely of all
to have known him. It is to be questioned whether there
was any Rosicrucianism at all in these islands during the
first quarter of the seventeenth century beyond that
which was centred in the person of Robert Fludd—a
restricted circle of course—and the whole subject may
have fallen into complete desuetude at his death in 1632.
340

-- Page 373 --
Later Continental History
We have now to return on the years, so far as the
Continent is concerned, to see what took place in
Germany and elsewhere during the period immediately
subsequent to 1620, until we reach a date, about 1630,
when tie records and doings of the Rosy Cross passed
into apparent suspension for a space of seventy years.
The, halter of the Thirty Years’ War had tightened
about the neck of the German people; the miserable
strife of sects was another yoke upon the land; the
blessing brought by Luther was as much qualified in
respect of reform as it was dubious in the matter of
freedom and desolating in the religious sense.

After 1620, but few and far between, there still emerged
for a moment some apologies for the Order, recalling those
which served no purpose in the past but to exhibit the zeal
of their writers and—in most cases—to notify that which
they sought. Among all it will be sufficient to cite the
following casual examples: (1) Scriprum AMIcaBILE, in
which the piety of the Brotherhood is defended against
impostors.t (2) A Curistian Epistie addressed to the
Brethren R -.C.. respecting its doctrine. (3) Tue GarpEn
or Roszs,? comprising a fundamental and apologetical
account of the new heavenly prophets, Rosicrucians,
Chiliasts and Enthusiasts, by George Rostius, who seems
also to have investigated alleged Rosicrucian calculations
on the subject of the Last Day. But this was in another
tract entitled Procnosticon THeotocicum, about which
I know nothing except that the date of publication was

1 Scrretum AMICABILE ad venerandam Fraternitatem R. C., in quo pietas
eorum contra Impostores defenditur. Francofurti, 1621.

2 CurisTLicHEs ScHREIBEN an die Bruderschaft R. C. wegen ibrer lebre,
thren meinungen, etc. Frankfurt, 1621.

3 Literally the Heroic Boox concerning the Garden, etc., which seems
nonsensical. The full title is: Hztpznsucn vom RosEnGarTEN, oder
griindlicher und apologetischer Bericht von dem newen bimmlischen Propbeten,
Rosenkreutzern, Chiliasten und Enthustasten, durch Georg Rostium.
Rostoch, 1622.

341

-- Page 374 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

1621. Some attacks of the same period were more to the
purpose—in violence of language at least. A notable
specimen is called Warninc To Rosicrucian VERMIN,' by
Philipp Geiger. It appears to have evoked a reply on the
part of J. H. Cochheim, described as of Holbrieden, but
the witness which he bore in defence of the Order, thus
scurrilously attacked, has eluded my research, even in the
matter of its title? Equally explicit in a different sense
seems another tract which I know only by name, that is,
Tue Farrurut Ecxuarr?—reflecting in its title an old
German legend. It speaks of Rosicrucian heresies relative
to baptism and conversion, evidently a recurrence to the
Anabaptist charge of earlier years. It describes the
Brotherhood as a disordered troop going to and fro in the
country and as a brigandage which slaughters souls. I am
unacquainted also with J. Brenna and his WooLcomBER’s
Farr of the Brothers of the Rosy Cross, which appeared in
1625, but it may be judged from the title. In conclusion
as to miscellaneous hostile criticism, I may mention
Johannes Robertus, a Jesuit of Luxembourg who died at
Namur in 1651. He was an opponent of Fludd, Goclenius
and others on the subject of cure by sympathy and the
so-called magnetic cure of wounds. One of his treatises
was published posthumously in Theatrum Sympatheticum,
Norimberge, 1662, and was entitled Goclenius Heauton-
timorumenos. It contains two sections, (1) on the Acheruntict
Fratercult who call themselves Brethren of the Rosy Cross

1 Warnwune fiir die Rosenkreutzer V ngeziefer. Heidelberg, 1621.

2 See Franz Fendenberg: us der Alteren GEscHICHTE DER RosEN-
CREUTZER, a small treatise, issued undated and with no place of publication.

3 Valentin Griesmann : Gerrewer Ecxnart, welcher in den ersten neun
Gemeinen Fragen der Wiedertaiferischen, Schwenk feldischen, etc., RosenkreutZ-
erische Ketzereyen im Lande herumstreichende wiiste Heer zu flichen .. -
verwarnet, etc. 1623. It might be useful to know more of this lucubra-
tion, because of the suggestion in the title that there were many going
about in Germany using the name of the Order to substantiate their
claims.

342

-- Page 375 --
Later Continental History
and (2) on the said Brotherhood as exhibited by their own
writings.

OF tracts which claim to speak with individual or official
authority from within the circle of initiation there is no
question that the most important and interesting is the
Ecuo Cotiogui of Benedict Hilarion noticed in my last
chapter; but there were other sporadic testimonies. I have
mentioned J. H. Cochheim—otherwise Kocheim von
Hellrieden—on the authority of Freudenburg, but he
can be traced in a more direct manner, for he entered the
field of debate for a second time in 1626, and now as a
professed alchemist who was able to lead those who wandered
through devious paths into the only straight way respecting
the true matter of the Philosophical Stone. His “ firm,
irrefutable and fundamental ” relation on these subjects
appeared at Strasbourg and was dedicated to the Land-
grave Maurice of Hesse,! who is described as his friend. It
is of our concern only because it describes the Brotherhood
as the Order of the Fleece, otherwise the Golden Cross,
recalling the insignia worn by Equites Aure: Lapidis in the
CuemicaL Marriace. It is said also that the association
ought not to be too easy of access and that persons of
vulgar status should not be admitted at all. It may seem
arbitrary to suggest that these statements are intended to
imply membership on the part of the writer and if I incline
in this direction it should be understood that the view
is tentative, while on either side it is not of particular
consequence. The new designation is in any case of some
importance, as it is the second of two early allusions to the
Society as an Order of the Golden Cross and the first and
only time that it is connected by a distinct designation with
the Golden Fleece—outside the Cuemicat Marriacz.

1 Tractatus Errantium in Rectam et Planam Viam Reductio, with a
long sub-title in German. It is an octavo pamphlet of 117 pages and was
issued on December 1 of the year 1626.

343

-- Page 376 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

According to Lenglet du Fresnoy, Peter Mormius
attempted to revive the Rosy Cross in Holland about 16301,
and we shall see shortly that there is some evidence for its
existence at the Hague in 1622. Moreover, he sought
audience of the States General as ambassador of the Order, to
lay before those august legislators the nature and importance
of its secrets. The States General saw fit to refuse him
audience, having possibly enough business in hand, and at that
time and in that place the story is that the projected second
birth also proved a failure. Mormius is represented as indig-
nant, more especially at his own treatment, and to mortify
*‘ those wise republicans” he issued a treatise at Leyden
on the most hidden secrets of Nature, brought to light by
the Collegium Rosanium.? As understood and represented
by him the Order was alchemical and concerned with
nothing but alchemy, the Universal Medicine and the
secret of perpetual motion. We have had ample evidence
already that it stood always and only for that which appealed
to its exponents, for spiritual mysteries acverding to
Robert Fludd, because in the last resource he understood
everything spiritually, but for the letter of occult claims
according to Peter Mormius, because the letter to him was
life. It is very probable that Temples and Colleges—or
whatever the title assumed by such fluidic foundations—rose
up there and here in Germany to represent the dedications
of those who after this manner sought to incorporate their
concerns.

It will be observed, however, that in this case the new
designation of Collegium Rosanium is not synonymous with
a College of the Rosy Cross. Mormius ceased from
testifying, but if in the absence of any quoted authority we

1 Hisrorre pe LA Purtosopnie Hermétique I, 379.

2 Arcana ToTIUs NATURE SECRETISSIMA, nec hactenus unguam detecta, 4
Collegio Rosanio in lucem produntur, opera Petri Mormii. Lugduni Bata-
vorum, 1630.

344

-- Page 377 --
Later Continental History

can trust Lenglet on the question of fact and admit that
the alchemist applied to the States General, his rebuff is
explicable on other grounds than those of preoccupation or
simple scepticism. There was Rosicrucian activity in
Holland prime to 1625 and in that year. It is said to have
been “old” in Amsterdam! and generally in the Nether-
lands.?_ We hear also of nocturnal meetings at Haarlem.
In the year mentioned the Court of Justice in the Dutch
Province of Holland sent to the Theological Professors at
Leyden for an opinion on certain printed books which
accompanied the letter of inquiry, and were concerned
with the “creed and doctrine ” of the Rosy Cross. ‘The
Leyden Faculty replied, reciting the claims and tenets found
in the Fama, from which manifesto it was concluded that
the sect in question was founded by Christian Rosencreutz,
that it was spread by initiated Brothers and that it pre-
tended to be a leading power in “the domain of religion.”
Examination shewed, however, that it was nothing but
false doctrine, fanaticism, magical art and so forth. It
should be therefore opposed in good time, as prejudicial to
Church and Republic. The best way of stopping the pro-
ceedings of the sect must be left to the judgment of the
Court, but the members might be dealt with as people on
the verge of insanity, unless they attacked the inviolability
of the Church and the peace of the State, in which case
they should be punished more severely. The document
setting forth these views is dated at Leyden on May to,
1625, and is signed by four members of the Faculty. It
resulted in a letter addressed to the Officers, Mayor and
Rulers of Haarlem, reciting what had been done and
further stating (1) that Rosicrucians from Paris had appeared
in the Provinces, (2) that the sect was increasing daily, (3)

1 Pp. P. Reubens: Lerrres Inéprres, 1840.

2 See L. Ph. C. van der Bergh: GravennaacscHE ByzonDERHEEDON,
1857, I, 66, 67.

345

-- Page 378 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

that its doctrines were heterodox and hurtful to the
Commonwealth and (4) that its meetings were held at
unreasonable hours and in different places. The instructions
were that the sect was to be watched and in particular
one of the principal members, named Thorentius. There
is no account of what followed, but the three documents—
thus fully described—are extant among the State Records,!
and if only five years subsequently Peter Mormius came
forward with pleas for a hearing on the subject of the Rosy
Cross, it is rather curious on the whole that he escaped so
easily.

There is another story of Holland and the Rosy Cross, the
scene of which is at the Hague, and it offers considerable
difficulties to research, owing to the mixed and elusive
nature of the evidence. It begins on the authority of
Nicolai, who says (1) that in the year 1622 there existed
at the place just mentioned a society which had adopted
the title df Rosy Cross and was concerned with alchemy ;
(2) that the founder was Christian Rose; and (3) that the
said Order had other assemblies at Amsterdam, Erfurt,
Nuremburg, Hamburg, Dantzic, Mantua and Venice.
This distribution suggests, however, the original establish-
ment-—whatever it can be held to have been—with Rose as
an envoy, rather than an invention of his own devised in the
likeness of the Fama. It must be said, further, that
Christian Rose seems to be a name rather than a person
who can be brought to book with a reasonable account
of himself. In so far as it responds to any test of identity
we find a Christian Rose in the last years of the eighteenth
century as a Knight of the Holy Sepulchre discoursing

1 My authority for this account is a manuscript in the Library of the
Quatuor Coronati Lodge, No. 2864, entitled: Rerporr READ BY THE
Htsrortca, Commission at the Meeting of the Supreme Head Chapter of
Higher Degrees, beld at the Hague on the 21st of May, 1864. I have given a
simple summary.

346

-- Page 379 --
Later Continental History

on the subject of Freemasonry.t As such he is nothing
to our purpose, nor do we fare better when his name
is transformed into Frederick by the fabulator magnus,
Kieswetter. On the authority of Peter Mormius, we
hear of a certain Rose, not otherwise designated, who
was very old in 1620 and dwelt on the frontier of
Dauphiny.2 He affirmed that he was a member of the
Golden Rosy Cross, which was composed of three persons
only and refused to accept Mormius, who had come over
from Spain in the hope of securing this advantage ; but in
the end Rose permitted the future author of Arcana
Tortius Natur to remain as his servant or famulus, and the
latter obtained sufficient knowledge to warrant in his own
opinion the attempted inauguration of Collegium Rosanium,
as already seen. The octogenarian or what not of 1620 could
not well have been the Christian Rose of 1622, and the
Order with three members which refused a fourth could
not have been the Hague foundation, dwelling—as it has
been said—in a palace. To make an end of enumerations
sub nomine, an apothecary named Jacob Rose is reported as
founding a Rosicrucian Society at Paris in 1660 which
lasted till 1674, when it was dissolved, owing—unaccount-
ably enough—to the Brinvilliers case. This is how the
records stand with the Hermetic Sodality at the Hague, as
regards the allegation of its origin. The Rose mythos
would seem to have originated with Mormius about 1630,
and as regards Christian Rose a moment’s reflection will
tell us that he stands for Christian Rosencreutz, “ the
chief and original of our Fraternity.” How and with whom
the misnomer first arose it would seem impossible to trace.®

1 Freye Bermuxuncen iiber die politische Verfassung des Ordens der
Freyen Maurer, von dem Bruder Curtstian Rosz. 1787.

2 It is perhaps on this authority that Morhof speaks of a Collegium
Rosanium founded by Rosay, 1620, in Dauphiny. See Potyuisrory, Book I,

15.
° Tt is possible that Mormius spoke at full length of Christian Rose,

347

-- Page 380 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

The authority for Nicolai’s Hague story is Ludovicus
Conradus Orvius, whose testimony by its claim is contem-
porary, though it first saw the light in 1737. The most extra-
ordinary confusion has been handed from one to another
in his respect, and when this is cleared up it must be said
that little remains, and that he is himself, after the manner
of a myth, represented by a single memorial which claims
to be the work of his hand. It is a tract of some eighty
pages in German, entitled Occutra Puitosopuia, oder
Celum Sapientum et Vexatio Stultorum, the preface to
which contains autobiographical matter of singular interest
and told in the opinion of Nicolai with convincing
simplicity. It affirms (1) that Orvius became a Rosicrucian
under the obedience of the sodality established at the Hague ;
(2) that he undertook many journeys at their instance ; (3)
that his considerable patrimony was dissipated, as well as
that of his wife, which amounted to eleven thousand
crowns; (4) that he lived miserably, while his chiefs led a
sumptuous life in magnificent palaces; (5) that he discovered
a book containing their pretended secrets and much more;
(6) that he was reprimanded sharply and the work was
burnt ; (7) that he gave a remedy for dropsy to a sick friend—
presumably a Rosicrucian nostrum; (8) that he was hailed
before a convention of adepts, whom Orvius describes as
“these great Pharisees” and was expelled; (9) that he was
threatened with death if he betrayed their secrets ; (10) that
he went forthruined ; and (11) that he had done as demanded,
“but after the fashion of women, who guard a secret
religiously, above all when they do not know it.’
giving the full name. I have been compelled to derive information from
there and here, as I have met with no copy of the text. It is presumably by
reflection from him that Gmelin regards the Hague Fraternity as originating
from Christian Rose on the borders of Dauphiny, but he has confused two
distinct and mutually exclusive accounts. See GescHicHTE DER CHEMIE,
1797, 98, I, 566, and II, 331

1 Compare De Quincey’s improved version: “Which secrets I have

348

-- Page 381 --
Later Continental History

In 1751 Johann Ludolph ab Indagine produced a new
edition of the Orvius tract, altering title and text, and
excising the most incriminating references to the Hague
Society. He styled his author L. C. von Bergen, otherwise
Montanus-an ascription rejected by Semler and one which
has helped to increase the general confusion, as among later
writers some speak of Montanus instead of Orvius while
others represent Orvius as editing a work of Montanus
with a preface concerning himself.2_ Three points remain
to be stated, namely, that Orvius is responsible for the
story of the wide distribution of the Order, which in the
opinion of Christopher von Murr is utter fabrication ;
that he pretends to have been misled by its chiefs for a
period of thirty years ;% and lastly that he represents
members as wearing in their secret assemblies a broad
blue ribbon, from which was suspended a gold cross
faithfully kept, and for the same reason that women keep secrets, viz.
because I have none; for their knavery is no secret.” It is pointed and
brilliant, but unhappily rather far from the original.

1 It was now called Grinpircue ANWEIsuNG zu der wahren Hermetischen
Wissenschaft. There are no particulars forthcoming of J. L. ab Indagine.
He is to be distinguished from Johann ab Indagine, a writer on chemistry,
astrology, physiognomy and chiromancy in the seventeenth century
commonly identified as Jeger of Nuremberg, and from Innocentius Liberius
ab Indagine.

2 Compare Thory’s Acta Latamorum, II, 255: “‘ These details and
many others are said to be in the preface of L. C. Orvius to the works of
Montanus entitled Principies or Hermetic Science.” For the rest, Thory’s
account of the Hague Rosicrucians is taken almost bodily from Essar sur Les
AccusaATIONS INTENTEES AUX TEMPLIERS, . . . avec une dissertation sur
Porigine de la Francmagonnerte, Amsterdam, 1783, translated from the
German of Nicolai. I suggest that the translation has been followed as
something readily available. The original appeared in 1783, i.e. Versucn
iiber die Beschuldigunger welche dem Tempelberrenorden gemacht worden und
iiber dessen Geheimniss, etc.

3 M. Sédir points out that if Orvius was expelled in 1622 he must have
started working with the Rosicrucians in 1592, and this would be very
important from my point of view, were it possible to establish. But even
if we accept Orvius as giving a more or less true account of his experiences, it
is difficult to accept the date on which he was driven out of the Society.

349

-- Page 382 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
surmounted by a rose. They were distinguished in public
by a small black ribbon, having apparently no jewel
attached to it.?

There is no need to join issue with Nicolai on the
convincing note of the recital here summarised. I am in
complete agreement with von Murr about Rosicrucian
places of assembly in palaces scattered far and wide between
the Hague and Mantua: there is not only no truth in such
testimony but no ring as of truth. It is possible that
Orvius was a personality of the early seventeenth century
and not an invention of more than one hundred years later ;?
but—to define the position clearly—we do not know, and to
say that there is anything evidential in his story would be
to talk against sense and reason. At the value of such an
opinion under such circumstances, but remembering the
many rumours of errant impostors under the mask of the

1 On the evidence of one of his alleged M8S., Kieswetter provides the
following variations: (1) that Rosicrucian neophytes at the Hague received
a black silk cord to be worn on the “‘ top buttonhole,” commemorating the
penal clause of their pledge, by which they agreed to be strangled with such
a cord rather than break the silence imposed upon them ; (2) that the blue
ribbon and golden cross ‘‘ with a rose on it ” were also conferred at reception ;
(3) that on the top of the head they wore “a shaven spot about the size of a
louis d’or ; (4) that most of them had recourse to a wig for the concealment
of this tonsure ; (5) that at sunrise on high festivals they left their residence
by a door facing East and waved a small green flag, awaiting a similar signal
from any Brother in the neighbourhood. These are the kinds of meetings
that take place in penny dreadfuls and not in real life, even with occult
dedications. We shall find, however, that they are a variant of procedure
belonging to the Laws of the Order in the early eighteenth, not in the
seventeenth century.

2 Findel calls him “ the faithful Urf,” to confuse the issues further and
says that he “ frankly exposed the cunning doings of these Rosicrucians,”
without mentioning where or when. Moreover he knows so little of the
subject and its criticism that he suggests L. C. von Bergen as perhaps the
founder of the Hague Society in place of Christian Rose. Kenneth
Mackenzie, substituting the suppressio vert for his more usual suggestio falst in
Rosicrucian matters, summarises and accepts the Orvius story, but takes care
that the Order does not appear in the matter. He says merely that Orvius
“ fell into bad hands.”

35°

-- Page 383 --
Later Continental History

Rosy Cross, it is more than credible that a gang of them
may have gathered at a specified point of the Netherlands
and pursued the avocation for which they were banded
together: it may be that one of their victims may have
left a record of his experiences under the name of Orvius,
and that it is tess or more accurate. I claim only to put an
end here—as I hope, once and for all—to the gospel
aspetts presented previously and repeated from mouth to
mouth by those who have made no attempt to investigate
the story. It is certain that when the Court of Justice
applied for information to the Theological Faculty there
must have been more than a rumour abroad of the Rosy
Cross in Holland, and the Hague was a likely place for
activities of a central kind. This is how the research stands
in respect of net result, and this is how it must be left.

The consideration of a tract on The Golden Age Restored?
belongs to a later chapter for reasons which will appear
therein, but as it was published originally in 1621 or 1622
the fact of its existence should be noted at this point,
since it claims to be written by a Brother of the Golden
Cross and speaks with high authority on the Hermetic
Mystery. The preface is dated March 23, 1622, but
according to Kloss it was published in the previous year
under the name of Hieronymus or Henricus Madathanus,
a pseudonym adopted by Adrian Mynsicht according to
Lenglet du Fresnoy, who fails to cite his authority. Four
other alchemical treatises? are ascribed to this author, but

1 Aureum SecuLum Repivivom, issued sine loco in 1621. It is described
in the sub-title as a rare and precious treatise, otherwise a seed, imparted to
Sons of True Wisdom and Sons of the Doctrine. In 1625 it was reprinted
as the first tract in Muszum Hermeticum, published at Frankfurt, and as the
second in Museum Hermeticum Rerormatum ET Amptiricatom, of which I
edited a translation in 2 vols., 1893. Finally, it reappeared—as we shall see—
in Tue Secrer Symsous or THE Rosicructans at Altona in 1783, the
pseudonym being given as Henricus Madathanus Theosophus.

2 Tuesaurus Mepico-Cuimicum, cum Tractatu pe Lapis Aurzto Purio-
sopHoruM, Lubeck, 1638, reissued at Leyden in 1645 and again at Lubeck in

351

-- Page 384 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

they do not mention the Rosy Cross and are therefore not
of our concern. It has been pointed out that the name
Hadrianus a Mynsicht can be written in an anagram as
Hinricus Madanathys (Madathanys). ‘The fact did not
transpire in England till 1895,! but was no doubt derived
from some old published source to which Lenglet had
access previously. The title of Count is conferred sometimes
on Mynsicht, but there are no particulars of his life. He
calls for remembrance because he is prized by Hermetists
who are not of the occult order and because there are
certain intimations in Tue Goipren Ace which are above
the level of common alchemical literature and the common
quests that some pursued with egg-shells and some in a
chariot of antimony. When Madathanus certifies that he
belongs to that or this—be it Rosy or Golden Cross—it is
obviously not evidence, but we have had good reason to see
that he does not stand alone, that there is in reality a
succession of witnesses, each at his value, and I feel for one
that it is following a line of less resistance to tolerate the
supposition that they belonged to something, whatever it
was, rather than to conclude that they were all lying. Some
of the deponents lied almost certainly, some of them who
may be taken to have borne tolerably faithful witness seem,
on the assumption that they were members, in a state of
such serious confusion that they had no means of knowing
1646. ARMAMENTARIUM Mepico-Curmicum, Rothomagi, 1651 and TxsTa-
MENTUM DE Lapipe Puriosoruico, 1664. According to Sédir, Madathanus
worked with his alter ego Herman Datich, who is mentioned in Tue
Goxpen AcE, at a marriage between the theosophy of Bohme and that of the
Hermetists, but Sédir is confusing Madathanus and Tue Secret SymMpots.

1 See a letter contributed to a magazine then edited by myself under the
title of Tue Unxnown Wor tp, Vol. I, p. 281. The communication in
question was signed Resurgam, Fra..R..R.'.et A.C... In connection with
Tue Gorpen Acs, it may be noted that I have also left over for later
consideration the anonymous Aureus T'ractatus, which appeared originally
in German, anno 1625, sine loco, namely, Ein Gitpener Tractat vom
PHILOSOPHISCHEN STEINE, etc., addressed to the Brotherhood of the Golden
Cross, another early illustration of the use of this variant.

352

-- Page 385 --
Later Continental History

whether a contemporary pamphleteer was himself initiated
or not. It is possible—as we have seen—that there was
already more than one group of putative adeptship, and a
hostile criticism put forward by a soi-disant Brother may
not.mean that its author was fooling or had intervened in
the debate to make money with a saleable article but that
he had outlived any belief in his particular obedience.
In the last resource, however, we have to recognise that
there were the “rogues and runagates”’ who plied their
trade in a topic of the time which was also a burning question,
while through all and in all there were the booksellers with
their vested interest, ready to sell anything on any side
of everything to all comers, asking no questions either of
those who bought or of those who brought them copy.

We have seen how the case is left when the year 1620
was drawn behind the gates of an irrepealable past, and this
is how it stands now when the sinews of assault had wearied
and the weapons of defence were blunt. Does it signify if
Pauma TriumpHALis derides the Fraternity because it
arrogates to itself such glorious titles, because it poses as a
Congregation of the Elect and the flower of the human
race, because it claims to be inspired divinely for the
reformation of the world, because it can restore all sciences,
prolong human life and transmute lead into gold?! And
what if Pére Garasse the Jesuit pillories those whom he calls
Fratres Rosarum Crucis as sorry rascals and a gang of

1 See Fredericus Fornerus, Episcopus Hebronensis : Parma TRIUMPHALIS
Miraculorum Ecclesie Catholice, Ingolstadii, 1621, pp. 437-39. It is an
exceedingly rare work and—as might be expected—there is no copy in the
British Museum. There is no year on the title-page, but the Epzstola
Dedicatoria to Emperor Ferdinand II is dated Sept., 1620, while the
Approbatio Facultatis Theologica is dated April 23, 1621, and the Concessio
Authori was granted in December of that year. The views which I have
cited occur in Lib. I, cap. 45, which is entitled Quid de Rosee@ Crucis
Fraternitate, cornicula, tot prodigiorum plumis picturata, sentiendum? ‘The
forty-eighth chapter contains a diatribe against the transmutation of metals,
which has never been practised apart from fraud and the deception of man.

2A 353

-- Page 386 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
drunken impostors,1 or that Kircher, who knew all things
and much that had no existence, regards them as an impious
race? Is it worth while to travel far through the works of
Campanella, or even through his Spanish Monarcuy, to
choose between rival rumours, according to one of which
he lampooned the “Tluminated Brothers of Rosy Cross,”
but according to another was a noted member of the
Order, as was also his amanuensis, Tobias Adami.? I have
wasted some days to no purpose over Jan Amos Komensky
—better known as Comenius—to find that Mrs. Cooper-
Oakley and some of her precursors were dreaming—
as expected—when they called him “a great and moulding
force on Freemasonry” and one who was “ actively
interested in the Rosicrucian movement.”4 It is not

1 The reference is to R. P. Garasse: La Docrrine Curieuse prs Beaux
Esprits DE ce Temps, Paris, 1623. He calls them a faction of idlers, whose
proper title is Brothers of the Cross of Roses—Fratres Rosarum Crucis—the
reason being that they were good drinkers who carried their wine well and
published their secrets only in taverns, the parlours of which had always a
crown of roses hung from the ceiling above the table, imposing silence on all
things spoken in the heat of wine.

2 Athanasius Kircher: Munpus Susrerranevs, p. 298.

3 It is Gabriel Naudé who says that Adamus belonged to the Brotherhood,
as shewn by his preface to Campanella’s Reauis PHiLosopHi= Epitocusticm
Partes Quatuor, Frankfurt, 1623, but it shews nothing of the kind, for it
contains no Rosicrucian allusions. Wigston affirms that Campanella was
“a noted member.” See Baconzana, Vol. I, new series, August, 1893,
probably following the author of Nimrop, who terms him “one of the
reputed founders of the association or gang called the Illuminated Brothers
of Rosy Cross.” On the other hand, Sédir, Joc. st#., p. go, says that Cam-
panella pilloried the Rosicrucians in Propromus PuiLosopu1®, 1617, as well
as in Tue Spanish Monarcuy. In the last there is an Appendix to the
second edition of 1623 which contains Christopher Besold’s statements
(1) as to the transparent character of the Fama, (2) as to the fact that the
R..C.. Brotherhood was the fiction of a playful mind, and (3) that men
of learning were fooled thereby. These are expressions of individual con-
temporary opinion, of the same and no further value than might be that of a
non-Mason delivering his judgment on those activities of 1717 which created
the Grand Lodge ofEngland. Thereis nothing in Propromus PuttosoPHiz.

4 See her Traces or a Hippen Trapition in Masonry anp MepravaL
Mysticism, 1900. One of her authorities is Ludwig Abafi: GrscHIcHTE
DER FREIMAUREREI IN OxsTERREICH UND Uncarn, 1890-91.

354

-- Page 387 --
Later Continental History

true, for example, that he joined J. V. Andrez, for the
latter was in Wiirtemburg and he in Austria, while about
1618, at the Leginning of the Thirty Years’? War, he was
exiled, ruined and took refuge in Poland. You can follow
quests like these through the long succession of years and
come to nothing; I have followed them from time
immemorial in respect of the Rosy Cross and have gained
only a touchstone of experience by which I seem to know
occult impositions and exaggerations at sight: of a truth
their name is legion.?

The tracts which I have mentioned briefly on both
sides of the debate do not pretend to exhaust the list,
but between 1630 and 1690 there was practically nothing
save the occasional reprint of a pamphlet already known
tous.? In the year last mentioned Adam A. Lebensevaldt,
as one looking back upon the past and taking stock there-
of, delivered his opinion on the craft and imposture of
the devil in false alchemy, with special reference to the
“‘ surprising Fraternity ” of the R..C.., whose medley

1 For example, Mackenzie, Royan CycLopmpia or FREEMASONRY,
includes among members of the Rosy Cross a certain Benjamin Joehla, said
to have been of Jewish birth but Christian faith. In proof of this there is
reproduced from Aurirontina Cuymica, London, 1680, a letter addressed
torFrederick, Duke of Holstein and Schleswig, which document proves only
that the personage in question was an alchemist of his period. There is not
one word of reference to any Secret Order.

2 There are sporadic reports which I have either found it impossible to
follow up or they prove to lead nowhere, as usual. In 1882 Dr. von Harless
published at Leipsic a second edition of his work on Jacon BOHME AND THE
ALCHEMISsTs, in which he mentions a Rosicrucian Society at work in 1641.
The authority is a manuscript seen by the writer and entitled TestaMENTUM :
it contained statutes, alchemical operations and so forth. But Dr. Harless
does not state where it is deposited, and he is dead long since. Here is one
indication which must be left to stand at its value. Another is in the
theosophical magazine Lucirer, Vol. IT, 188, containing an article by Karl
XXX, entitled Finger-Posts in the Middle Ages. It pretends to explain how

the Brothers of the Rosy Cross taught “the finding of the Way,” citing
certain instructions alleged to date from 1675 and beginning with “a letter
of warning against the effort to obtain wealth and power by easy ways.”
This letter states that the Brothers R..C.'., “impelled by the Spirit of
355

-- Page 388 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
of claim and doctrines is described as a devil’s brew for
poisoning souls.

The subject was now dead and done with, to all
intents and purposes, so far as Germany is concerned.
Those who defended and those who attacked the Order,
without claiming to be acquainted with it at first hand,
had exhausted the general considerations which arose
from official texts and the occasional aids of rumour.
They could contribute nothing to knowledge, and their
numberless productions belong solely to the arena of
debate. On the other hand, those who claimed
to speak from within the initiated circle, if they are
to be accepted on their own terms, present us with
new claims respecting the Order, the traditional history
of which, according to Fama Fraternitatis, has passed
out of sight. They have gone back upon the centuries
to seek and find their origin. It is as if a new generation
had arisen with new views, or as if the influence of
Michael Maier had satisfied them that they were much
older than they had dreamed. We have seen also that
some of the official documents are exceedingly suspicious
in character. In so far as there are traces of a claim in
respect of dedication and purpose akin to those of Robert
Fludd, I am disposed to think that it was put forward
seriously and represented a secret theosophical group
interlinked for the study of the relations between God,
man and the universe, and that in such pursuits they had
made a certain progress, as—on the assumption of their
zeal and sincerity—they could not fail to do. Benedict
God ” have already in various languages “ pointed out the Way ” but have
been misunderstood by “the Masses” (sic), who imagined that they
“ desired to teach the art of making gold by alchemical means.” The secret
must be attained, however, in quite another manner. ‘There is no need to
say that the locality of the alleged instructions does not transpire, but some of
the excerpts are referable to the old communication concerning the Mountian
great and small in medio terre, with which I have dealt elsewhere in the
present work.

356

-- Page 389 --
te. dtl Lad Ch te

i:

Later Cont.

Hilarion’s Ecuo CoLLoqul
of this kind. On the oth¢
position that certain lat
ninth chapter and swarr
were the work of prete!
together. ‘The kind of
to the first class would me
a blending of the Imirat
of pseudo-Tauler and T:
Revetations or Divine M
of Jacob Béhme. It wor
errors of enthusiasm, but
lessons of caution from t
fatal prophecies. It had
and may have been dis}
return of Christ in the h
the apocalyptic Second C
heaven.

The later Continental
not confined entirely to
though French translatic
Neptia Cuymic# belo
its rumour passed over t.
there seems to be no qu
least the walls of Paris w
which has been quoted
contemporary writers. 4
was worded as follows :1
College of the Rosy Cre
invisible, in this town, by
Whom the hearts of sag
help of books or signs,
every country wherein v

1 [nsrrucTION A LA FRANCE §
LA Roze-Crorx.

inental History

1 may have issued from a group
sr hand, it is a colourable pro-
.- documents analysed in my
ning with exaggerated claims
iders who were also grouped
theosophy which I attribute
st probably have evolved from
ton oF Curist, the Poor Lire
rgeoLoGIA GERMANICcA with the
AjESTY and the deep searchings
ild have been subject to many
it might have learned certain
hose of Simon Studion and his
lost interest in the Man of Sin
yosed to substitute a spiritual
earts of dedicated Brethren for
oming in the clouds of a visible

history of the Rosy Cross is

the German Fatherland, and
ms of Fama FRATERNITATIS and
ng to bibliographical dreams,
he Rhine in the year 1623, for
estion that on one occasion at
ere placarded with a manifesto
in different terms by different
According to Gabriel Naudé, it
““ We, the deputies of our Head
ss, NOW sojourning, visible and
grace of the Most High, towards
es turn, do teach, without the
how to speak the language of
e elect to stay, in order that we

UR LA VERITE DE L’HisTorre DES FRERES DE

357

-- Page 390 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

may rescue our fellow-men from the error of death.”
It will be seen that the purport of this proclamation
remains obscure, it being difficult to understand how the
acquisition of this or that language is going to save a
learner from the common fate of mortality. An alterna-
tive version was as follows: ‘‘ We, who are deputies
of the College of the Rosy Cross, do counsel all who seek
entrance into our congregation that they should become
initiated into the service of the Most High, in Whose
cause we are at this day assembled. Our part shall be
then to transform them from visible into invisible beings
and again from invisible into visible. They shall be
transported, moreover, into all countries whither their
desire may lead them. But let him who reads be warned
that we are able to divine his thoughts and that if in
seeking to arrive at a knowledge of such wonders, and
in his desire to see us, he is prompted by curiosity alone,
let him rest assured that he shall never establish com-
munication. If actuated on the other hand by a true
desire to be inscribed on the register of our Confraternity,
we will make evident to such an one the validity of our
promises, but will not unveil the place of our abode,
seeing that simple thought, joined to a resolute will,
shall be sufficient to make us known by him and him
reveal to us,” }

1 ErFrroyanLe PacTIONs FAITES ENTRE LE DIABLE ET LES PRETENDUS
Invisisxes, avec leurs Damnables Instructions, perte déplorable de leurs Escoliers
et leur Misérable Fin. Paris, 1623—a pamphlet of the period, belonging to
the colportage class. Hliphas Lévi quotes this version of the proclamation,
adding the following remarks: “ Public opinion took hold of this mysterious
manifesto, and if any one asked openly who were these Brothers of the Rosy
Cross, an unknown personage would perchance take the inquirer apart, and
say to him gravely : ‘ Predestined to the reformation which must take place
speedily in the whole universe, the Rosicrucians are depositories of supreme
wisdom, and as undisturbed possessors of all gifts of Nature, they can
dispense them at pleasure. In whatsoever place they may be, they know all
things which are going on in the rest of the world better than if they were
present in the midst of them. They are superior to hunger and thirst and

358

-- Page 391 --
Later Continental History

Whatever its original form, the proclamation was in
manuscri;t and was evidently put up as a jest to set
Paris by the ears. Naudé calls it a comedy and accounts
for it by supposing that French booksellers had returned
from the fair at Frankfurt with some of the German
pamphlets concerning the Order. He adds that the
King was at Fontainebleau, the realm at peace and that
there was a scarcity of topics on Change, whence some
one undertook to supply a subject of gossip, reckoning
that there were fools enough in Paris to prevent the
folly from stagnating. We might leave it at this, with
an encomium on the good sense of the Instruction and
its author; but unfortunately Naudé goes further to
fare worse and forfeit our conditional esteem, for he
affirms elsewhere not only that there were Colleges of
the Rosy Cross in Canada and India, but also an establish-
ment of the kind in “ underground Paris,” and that
its members were precursors of Antichrist. It seems
peculiarly hard after bearing such unqualified testimony
that Gabriel Naudé should be classed by the egregious
Kenneth Mackenzie as a Brother of the Rosy Cross.}
have neither age nor disease to fear. They can command the most powerful
spirits and genli. God has covered them with a cloud to protect them from
their enemies, and they cannot be seen except by their own consent—had
any one eyes more piercing than those of the eagle. ‘Their general assemblies
are held in the pyramids of Egypt ; but even as that rock whence issued the
spring of Moses, these pyramids proceed with them into the desert and will
follow them until they enter the Promised Land.’” See my translation of
Lévi’s History or Macic, second edition, pp. 358-9. I have very little
doubt that the French occultist manufactured this encounter with a putative
adept, turning up at convenient moments to answer a supposed question of
the hour. The pamphleteers of the period and that general reservoir of
current gossip, the Mercure pz France, know nothing about it.

1 In reality he is reflecting, without reference, from Clavel. See Royat
CycLopz£piA oF FREEMASONRY, 1877, p. 631, s.v. EMINENT Rosicructrans.
Notwithstanding his classification, Mackenzie admits that Naudé was
opposed to Rosicrucian theories, as appears in his “several works” on
the subject. Naudé, however, wrote only one tract on the claims of the
Brotherhood.

359

-- Page 392 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

The anonymous author of another pamphlet? is
much more fully informed and does not falter for a
moment over the grave subject. A fell intention lay
behind the placard, for Satan himself was chief of the
execrable College, the Rules of which were (1) denial of
God, (2) blasphemy against the Holy ‘Trinity, (3)
trampling on the Mysteries of Salvation, (4) spitting in
the face of the Holy Mother of God and at all the Saints,
(5) renunciation of Baptism and the intercession of the
Church, (6) sacrifice to Satan, (7) Black Magic and fre-
quenting the Witches’ Sabbath. The placard, for the
rest, was a summary of “flagrant blasphemies.”? On
the other hand the Fricutrut Compacts, already cited,
was the work of a venal pamphleteer who saw money in
the madness and fed it with incredible stories of drowning
and suicide which followed the experiences of initiation.
For example, an Anglo-Frenchman who had taken the
fatal step, being anxious to revisit England, was at once
translated to Boulogne, but the demon who bore him
flung him headlong into the sea between Calais and Dover,
“with a frightful noise.” No less than two hundred
Dutch ships, on their course from Amsterdam to India,
were present at this catastrophe. As regards the College
of Rosicrucians and its history, there were certain Articles
of Agreement with a Necromancer named Respuch,
and these had been signed by members with their own

1 EXAMEN SUR LA NOUVELLE ET INCONNUE CaBALE DES FRERES DE LA CROIX-
Rozts, habituez depuis peu de Temps en la ville de Paris. Ensemble ? Histoire
des meurs, coutumes, prodiges et particularitez d’iceux, Paris, 1623. There
was a second edition in 1624, and this was reprinted by Edouard Fournier in
the first volume of his Varrérés Hisroriques et Lrrréraires, 1855. Fournier
states that the Rosicrucians began to make themselves known in 1604, “ after
the opening of the tomb of their Master had delivered to them great secrets
written in letters of gold.” He was further of opinion that Nuri
Cuymica includes a criticism of Rosicrucian doctrine. The points are
worth noting as illustrating the extent and limits of French knowledge on the
subject in the middle of the nineteenth century.

360

-- Page 393 --
Later Continental History

blood. They correspond substantially to the Rules
already mentioned and were executed in the presence of
Astaroth, manifesting as a beautiful youth and ratifying
them on behalf of his Master Satan. In consideration of
this concordat the Rosicrucians had power to go invisible,
to pass through locked doors, to read the most secret
thoughts, to be carried from place to place at will, to
speak with talismanic eloquence in every language and to
wear each of them a gold ring enriched by a sapphire, to
which was bound a demon as guide and mentor. It is
understood otherwise that all of them renounced Christ
and the grace of Christian sacraments. They were thirty-
six adepti in all, of whom some were commissioned to
France, others to Germany, Italy, Spain, Switzerland,
Sweden, Flanders, Lorraine and Burgundy, or—as it is
alleged—into Catholic countries only, the lands of heretics
and infidels, without the pale of the Church, being “ already
in the claws of hell.” Those envoys who carried the French
powers reached Paris on horseback, July 14, 1623, and
ultimately took up their quarters in the Marais du Temple,
soon after issuing the placards which introduced France
to a knowledge of the debatable Order.? It is said to have
raised curiosity, alike among learned and simple, on account
of the great gifts claimed by the Brethren, but especially
those of going invisible, speaking all tongues and discovering
inward thoughts. As it was agreed generally that such
powers could not come from God, the intervention of the
Devil was assumed.

So far the Fricutrut Compacts, and its revelations of
a lying spirit for the delectation of fools. But there is
also the Mercure ve France, which has claims on sober

1 They met, however, where the resolution of the moment took them,
to-day in the quarries of Montmartre, to-morrow on the height of Parnassus,

® A much fuller account of all the inventions will be found in my Rea.
Hisrory oF THE Rosicructans, c. XIV.

361

-- Page 394 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
history, however often its plain tales suggest the hand of
fiction. It says (1) that a popular panic was created by
fear of the mysterious sect ; (2) that ridiculous stories were
circulated day by day and found a ready ear—presumably
like those of the Compacts; (3) that hostelries reported
strange guests who vanished in a cloud when the time of
reckoning came, or paid in gold coin which proved slate
on the next morning; (4) that peaceable citizens awoke
in the middle night to find mysterious visitants at their
bedside and that when an alarm was raised they became
invisible suddenly ; (5) that people began to sleep with
loaded muskets at hand ; and (6) that strangers in the public
streets were liable to be stoned if they could not account
for themselves in a way which gave satisfaction. It is pre-
tended that suspicion and excitement lasted for two years,
but this is on other testimony than that of the periodical
print. Hereof is the Rosy Cross in France of the seven-
teenth century; and when at last the agitation died Paris
forgot the Order till High Grade Masonry gave to it the
Rose-Croix degree, or till Lenglet du Fresnoy wrote his
Histoire DE LA PuHILosoPHIE HERMETIQUE a few years earlier.
The Fama Fraternitatis and Nurtia Cuymicm@ remain
untranslated to this day. We know only that the French
philosopher Descartes sought tidings of the Rosy Cross—
as it is said, throughout Germany—and heard from
impostors but nothing on the genuine side of the sub-
ject.1. Presumably, like Leibnitz after him, he concluded
that the Order and its story belonged to the realm of
romance.

1 Jt calls to be said that this inquiry was made circa 1619—when
Descartes was in Suabia—and therefore prior to the time when Rosicrucian
placards appeared on the walls of Paris. The story respecting Leibnitz is
that he heard of a secret society of chemists at Nuremberg, under the name
of the Rosy Cross; that he applied for admission; that he was received
with honour and was offered the position of secretary at a salary, I think
that the story in this form is told by Fontenelle in Exoczs pes ACADEMICIENS.

362

-- Page 395 --
CHAPTER XIII
THE AWAKENING IN ENGLAND
Ir is very difficult—in the absence of all records—to hold
any opinion, however speculative, on the influence of
Robert Fludd in England during his life-time and on what
he may have left behind him. There is evidence, though
it is confined to his own writings, that he was a persona
grata to the restless and suspicious mind of King James I,
but he who cultivated “ the divine art of poesie,” feared
witchcraft and misliked tobacco, was succeeded by Charles
I in 1625, and there is nothing to shew that the White
King and martyr, who perished for the royal prerogative,
ever saw the Kentish philosopher, though we have found
that the latter survived his royal patron for twelve years.
Whether Fludd’s translation from earthly to heavenly
life on September 8, 1637, left vacant the place of a Master
in some Hermetic Circle offers a tempting field of debate,
but if it should be travelled on our own part it would
be found that there is unfortunately no expectation that
it will become a field of knowledge. We are never likely
to know what kind of procession—if any—what mourners
but near kinsmen, accompanied the remains of Fludd from
his London house in Coleman Street to the parish church
of Bearsted. Except in the minds of villagers along that
countryside, the act of death may have put his very name
to sleep. So far furthermore as all evidence is concerned,
it would be difficult to say that anything but the vaguest
rumour of the Rosy Cross had reached England, except
in the studies of a few Latin-reading scholars—with Fludd
363

-- Page 396 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
as their possible centre. There was nothing available in
the vernacular, not even the memorial addressed by Fludd to
King James being hidden in the court archives. If I express
my personal opinion, it is probable enough, it seems indeed
especially likely, that—however restricted—there was a
living circle of which the centre was Robert Fludd. I
have said that he was a man of considerable personality,
of fervid zeal in conviction, and by no means of that kind
whose light would be under a bushel ; but there is not one
scrap of paper to testify in this direction. We know that
at Mason’s Hall, a few yards from his house, a Lodge of
non-operative Masons was meeting in the year 1620 and
thence onward. We know that among its records was a
Book oF Constitutions, “ which Mr. Fflood gave.” It is
idle to assume that this donor was Robertus de Fluctibus
or to affirm that he was therefore a member; but again
the facts offer an attractive field of speculation. The list
of Accepted Masons belonging to this Lodge was destroyed
in the Fire of London. What if the Rosicrucian apologist,
as a later Hermetist turned to Operative Masonry—the
great antiquary Elias Ashmole—had looked for something
to his purpose in this mysterious Acception, about which
we can ascertain so little and would give so much to learn?
What if his circle were there? It can be said only that
in such case an old feeling of Masonic Iterati that early
Speculative Masonry grew up under a Rosicrucian zgis
would become a much more colourable hypothesis than it
has proved so far. Had most of the writers who have
preceded me been acquainted with these facts they would
have seen no field of speculation but a wide world of
certitude, and as if in possession of inexpugnable docu-
mentary evidence would have affirmed that Robert Fludd
was the father of Speculative Masonry, that it was he and
no other who founded the Lodge of Acception. Had they
carried investigation a few paces further, they would have
364

-- Page 397 --
The Awakening in England
found that the meagre traces of this fellowship begin in
the year which I have mentioned—namely, .1620—and it
would have been like a light descending from heaven to
support the view. I hope at least that I have forestalled
any “rake’s progress”? of the future and closed this house
of call against them.

So far as our knowledge goes—whatsoever of occult
or spiritual mystery was connoted at that period by the
Rosy Cross fell asleep in England and was buried for the
time being with its great protagonist in the Church of
the Holy Cross at Bearsted. It may have been asleep
previously, for CLavis Puttosopui# et ALcHYMi#®, though
not the last work from the pen of Robert Fludd, is the
last in which ‘he refers to the German Brotherhood, and
it was issued in 1633. The question of the Order rose up
once more in the year 1650 with the first publication of
the famous alchemist and mystic Thomas Vaughan. It
is necessary, however, in the first place to consider what
I must term the legend of Elias Ashmole, prominent as he
otherwise is in the literature and history of his period.

1 Tt is an inchoate and contradictory story in all its variations, as there is
no need to say, and began presumably with Nicolai, according to whom—
writing in 1783—the persons present when Ashmole was made a Mason at
Warrington in 1646 were members of the Rosicrucian Fraternity. In 1784
Nicolas de Bonneville recounts that London Rosicrucians and Masons were
united by General Monk to promote the return of Charles [I—after what
manner does not emerge in the fable, except that according to Yarker they
added five symbols to their collection drawn from the work of Typotius, to
which I have referred elsewhere. There is no truth in this story, and it
would signify nothing if there were. Anthony 4 Wood describes Ashmole as
“a certain Rosy-crusiah ” in his account of Edward Kelley, otherwise Talbot
(Ata. Ox., I, 639 e¢ seg., ed. of Bliss). Heckethorn improves previous
accounts by alleging that Ashmole, Lilly, Wharton, J. Hewitt and J. Pearso
formed a Rosicrucian Society in London, anne 1646, on the plan of Bacon’s
New Aruantis. The Meetings were at Mason’s Hall. He is evidently
following Reghellini, according to whom (1) Ashmole and others modelled
their foundation on the Hague Rosy-Cross and undertook to write somewhat
more clearly than the German Brethren, yet were unwilling to communicate
their discoveries outside the pale of their Society—‘“ through fear of

365

-- Page 398 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
In my New Encycitopzpia oF Freemasonry it has been
analysed at a certain length, but more especially in its
Masonic bearings, which are not of our concern here.
I have shewn, however, (1) the fact of a recurring legend
that Ashmole belonged to a Rosicrucian Brotherhood
established in England, whether by himself or others,
about or before the year 1646 ; (2) that there is no evidence
to support it, except indeed (3) that his introduction to
a notable collection of ancient Britannic tracts on the
subject of alchemy impresses me as “a faithful reflection
of Rosicrucian doctrine”; and on this account (4) that
it is perhaps possible to presume his membership tenta-
tively, as also, in such case (5) that he did not stand alone.
How guarded these statements soever, it seems to me that
they err on the side of toleration, for the legend itself
is founded on no considerations of internal evidence
offered by an extant text but on matters of pure invention.
Having dealt with them adequately for my purpose in
the work already cited, it must be sufficient to state here
as typical examples (1) that according to Eckert, Elias
Ashmole founded an English Order of the Rosy Cross
in 1646 on the plan of the Brotherhood in Germany ;
(2) that, assisted by his fellow-Rosicrucians—according
to Ragon—he transformed Operative into Speculative
Masonry for ulterior reasons cherished by the Hermetic
Order ; (3) that in other words, and now according to
the reveries of Dr. Papus, Freemasonry was established in
England by the Fraternity of the Rosy Cross and still carries,
for those who can read, the outward and inward marks,
persecution.” (2) He says also that Ashmole rectified the formule of
reception, basing them almost entirely on those of the old Egyptian and
Greek Mysteries. The Hague formule, however—if any—are unknown,
and the last statement is literally taken from Thory—Acta Laromorum—
who follows De Bonneville, and he appeals in turn to Br1ocRAPHIA
Brirannica, 1778, s.v. Ashmole, but it contains nothing to the present
purpose.
366

-- Page 399 --
The Awakening in England

characte cistic signs and seals of its occult origin. These are
peremptory statements, at once unqualified and apart
from all foundation, nor—except by a bare possibility in
the case of the German Eckert—can they be explained by
the invincible ignorance which has used Rosicrucian and
Alchemist as synonymous or interchangeable terms for
considerably over a century.

Were it possible in the light of his dedications and the
peculiar Hermetic complexion of his religious and philo-
sophical sentiments to regard Ashmole as integrated in
the Rosy Cross, I have said that he would not stand alone,
meaning that I should regard the fact as connoting some-
thing perpetuated through the few years which intervened
between the death of Fludd and the publication of
TueatruM Cuemicum Britannicum, the connecting links
being furnished by people like William Backhouse, who
was Ashmole’s teacher in alchemy and confided to him its
root-secret concerning materia prima. ‘There is nothing
that is difficult or arbitrary in such an assumption, but
on the other hand there is nothing to support it. Elias
Ashmole was born on May 23rd, 1617, and died at the age
of nearly 75 on May 18th, 1692. His living memorial is the

1 As I have mentioned Wood’s reference to Ashmole, I may add as a
cufious point under all the circumstances that he himself has escaped
unaccountably the honour of being classed among Brethren of the Order in
England, having regard to the fact that in his own autobiography he records,
under date of April 23, 1663, 14 Car. II, how he “ began a course of chimistry
under the noted chimist and Rosicrucian, Peter Sthael of Strasburgh in
Royal Prussia.” It concluded in the May following. The “club,” as it is
called, consisted of at least ten members, including Francis Turner of New
College, afterwards Bishop of Ely, Benjamin Woodruff, who became Canon
of Christ Church, and John Locke, “afterwards a noted writer.” Peter
Sthael was a Lutheran and “ a great hater of women,” which is one of Wood’s
favourite formule in describing a supposed Rosicrucian. He was brought to
Oxford by Robert Boyle in 1659, where he erected a laboratory and took
pupils. He went to London in 1664 “and became operator to the Royal
Society.” His death occurred about 1675 and he was buried in the church
of St. Clement’s Dane. Wood says that personally he gained some knowledge
and experience, but his mind “ still hung after antiquities.”

367

-- Page 400 --
. The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
Ashmolean Museum at Oxford, while his notable work
on the ORDER OF THE Garter is his chief title to considera-
tion as an authority on British antiquities. It lies outside
our subject, but he was also—as I have intimated—a
collector of alchemical literature and an editor of priceless
English texts. Furthermore, he was an amateur of the
Art itself. He considered that its ‘‘ Elected Sons” were
“ given to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God,”
as “ our Saviour said to his disciples,” thus suggesting that
he concurred with Fama FraTerniratis in maintaining
that there is a higher side of Alchemy, comparable to a
detection of all Nature.t As a fact, in distinguishing the
four Stones of Philosophy, which are like corner-stones
at the four angles of the House of Hermetic Wisdom, he

1 Turatrum CHEMicum BrITANNICUM, containing several Pieces of our
famous English Philosophers, who have written the Hermetic Mysteries in their
own Ancient Language. Fatth fully collected into one volume, with annotations,
by Evias Asumore, Eso. Qut est Mercurius Anglicus. London: Printed
by John Grismond for Nathaniel Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill. 1652.
It is termed the First Part. Ashmole always intended to make a further
ingarnering, presumably in several sections or volumes, and the Bodleian
Library shews that he had ample materials. Six years later he published a
single tract, explaining his hindrances and saying that it was designed “to
be included in one of the later parts of THEaTRUM CHEMICUM BRITANNICUM.”
See Tue Way To Briss. In Three Books. Made public by Exias Asumote,
Esa. London, 1658. The editor is now described as Mercuriopbilus Anglicus,
the printer and publisher being as in the previous case. The motto
on the title-page is: Deus nobis hac otia fectt. The tract is of unknown
authorship and is referred by Ashmole to the end of the fifteenth or beginning
of the sixteenth century ; but—as printed at least—the text bears few marks
of such a considerable antiquity. It is not of our concern otherwise, except
in the very subsidiary sense of the editor’s prefatory remarks. In these he
tells us (1) that “‘ the author was without doubt an Englishman ” ; (z) that
the text is printed from a perfect copy ; (3) that he has included the annota-
tions of Dr. Everard, translator of the Divinz Pymanper ; (4) that the copy
is a transcript of an original, discovered by a “laborious searcher,” who
found also “three grains of the powder closed up between two leaves
thereof, with which he made projection”; (5) that a “ pretended ” text,
imperfect and interpolated, had appeared previously in Tue Wisz Man’s
Crown, under the editorship of Eugenius Theodidactus, about whom we
shall hear at length in the present chapter.

368

-- Page 401 --
The Awakening in England
quotes from the Fama verbatim: ‘“ And certainly he to
whom the whole course of Nature lies open rejoiceth not
so much that he can make gold and silver or the devils
be made subject to him as that he sees the heavens open,
the angels of God ascending and descending, and that his
own name is fairly written in the Book of Life.” + This
citation is made without reference to source in the pro-
legomena to Tueatrum Cuemicum Brirannicum. ‘The
preface alludes also to Frater 1..0.., “ one of the first
four Fellows of the Fratres R..C.:., who cured the young
Earl of Norfolk of the leprosy.” Finally, it mentions
Michael Maier and his translation of Thomas Norton’s
Orprnat into Latin, from an independent codex.?

It follows that Ashmole had the mind of the Rosy Cross,
and that he believed himself to have proceeded a certain
distance on the path of attainment in the physics of the
Hermetic subject emerges from certain autobiographical
fragments which appeared many years after his death.
Some one has remarked previously that the so-called Lirz,
by way of Diary, is filled with his minor ailments, and this
is true enough. It might be said also that it registers
religiously his presence at the annual Astrologer’s Feast,?

1 Tt may be noted that there is an English version of the Fama among
the Ashmolean MSS., No. 1459, fols. 284-99. It is entitled Fama Frarerni-
tatis, or @ Discovery of the Fraternity of the Laudable Order of the Rose
Crosse, from us the Brethren of the Fraternity R. C. to all that with a Christian-
like censure shall reade this our fame, be our salutation, love and prayers. It
is followed by the Conressto, which seems to end on p. 311. Mr. F.N.
Pryce informs me that it proves on examination to be in the hand of Elias
Ashmole. There is also Ashmole, 1478, fol. 125-30, containing both texts.
It is not possible in either case to identify the translation with that edited
by Vaughan.

2 A collation of Ashmole’s text with the Latin of Maier produces
innumerable variations of a verbal kind but little essential difference. On
the contrary both versions are the same substantially and reflect creditably
upon the German alchemist’s familiarity with the English language.

3 He was chosen Steward on August 8th, 1650. There was also a Mathe-
matical Feast, which he attended on at least one occasion.

2B 369

-- Page 402 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
his infrequent journeys in England, his occasional pre-
ferments, his differences with Lady Mainwaring, who
became his second wife but applied for a separation and
failed therein. It is poor and lean enough, the entries, as
printed, being in the proportion of two or three in each
month of the period covered ; but it is quite certain that
it was never intended for publication, and we must therefore
be content with what we have, as it fills a gap which would
otherwise have remained vacant.t Moreover, it specifies
certain salient points or red-letter days of his relations with
William Backhouse, the alchemist already referred to. For
Ashmole, in view of his interests, they were no doubt the
most important events of his intellectual life. Backhouse
is mentioned first on April 3, 1651, and is described as of
Swallowfield in Berkshire. It is said that on this date he
caused his pupil to call him Father thenceforward. On
June 10 of the same year it is noted that his teacher had
communicated many secrets to him. ‘The entry of October
10, 1651, states that ‘this morning my Father Backhouse
opened himself very freely, touching the Great Secret.”
Again, on April 12, 1652: “ This morning I received more
satisfaction from my Father Backhouse, in answer to the
questions I proposed.” But finally and most important,
there is the entry of May 13, 1653: ‘‘ My Father Back-
house, lying sick in Fleet Street, over against St. Dunstan’s
Church, and not knowing whether he should live or die,
about eleven of the clock, told me in syllables the True
Matter of the Philosopher’s Stone.”? Among the age-long

1 See Memorrs or THE Lire of that Learned Antiquary, Evias AsHMOLE,
drawn up by Himself, by way of Diary. London, 1717. The text is said to
be printed from a copy in the handwriting of Dr. Robert Plot.

2 The Catalogue of Ashmolean MSS., No. 58, shews that William Back-
house was of Swallowfield in Berkshire, esquire—as stated in the text above.
In 1644 he translated Tue Preasanr Fountain or Know tence, written in
French by John de la Fountaine, anno 1413, and it appears in this MS. The
translator’s name is an addition by Ashmole. See also No. 1395, col. 1089;

37°

-- Page 403 --
The Awakening in England
memorials of alchemy on the historical side, this last record
may be said to stand alone: I know of no other in which
an adopted pupil and chosen Son of the Art confesses how
and from whom he received the secret. Ashmole lived for
forty years after this great event and pursued his researches
as an antiquary. There is not the least reason to suppose
that he proceeded to any practice ; presumably the secret
was physical and a knowledge of the matter may have
left him dependent on texts for the modus operandi.
Whether Backhouse himself had succeeded is a problem
which lies behind the darkness of our ignorance concerning
him, while over and above this doubt there is the far more
fatal question whether that which he passed on represented
certitude based on experimental knowledge or on hypothesis
only. On the other hand, supposing—perhaps against all
likelihood—that Backhouse revealed the First Matter of the
work in alchemy as a work on the soul, not on the body of
things, it may be that the pursuit of such an experiment lay
outside the calling of Ashmole and that the revelation was a
dead secret. However this may be, the preface of Tue
Way to Buss, published some years after the key had been
put into his hands, is a poor and negligible performance in
comparison with the prolegomena to Turarrum CHEMICUM
Brirannicum, which was prior to the great event. There-
after he published no further Hermetic texts.
containing Tur Goupen Frerscy, or the Flower of Treasures, described as trans-
lated out of French by William Backhouse, the original author calling himself
Solomon Trismosin. The work is of considerable length and the translation
is an extract only. It should be mentioned that Heydon ascribed to Back-
house his version of Tw Way ro Burss and bibliographers unacquainted with
Ashmole’s text have been misled accordingly. So also was the Rev. A. F. R.
Woodford in his Encycrorzpia or Freemasonry, Ashmole’s account of
the work has obviously mythical elements, but there is no reason to suppose
that he would suppress wilfully the fact of its authorship had he been
acquainted therewith. Backhouse provided the copy for printing. See
Gould : Hisrory or Frezmasonry, II, 132. It may be added that Backhouse
did not die till May 30, 1662.

371

-- Page 404 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

This is the case as it stands for Elias Ashmole as a Brother
of the Rosy Cross: he had been instructed in alchemy ;
on one occasion he borrowed without acknowledgment
from one of the manifestoes; and he reproduces notions
from a so-called Book or St. Dunstan, couching them in
language which has a distinct flavour of the Rosicrucian
manner of writing. I continue to think that if there were
living members of the Order in England between the death
of Fludd and the date of his own passing, it is probable that
he was one of them ; but it is all high speculation, and there
is little ground for supposing that things may be discovered
hereafter which will open a door to certitude hereupon.
As we know that he was a theoretical alchemist, we know
also that he was a Mason, that he was initiated in 1646 and
long years after attended a Meeting of Lodge or Acception
at Mason’s Hall in London.t Out of his Hermetic interests
has arisen his Rosicrucian legend and out of the fact that
he who was a non-operative became—for reasons unknown
but probably of an antiquarian kind—the member of a guild
of craftsmen, there has arisen that other legend, according
to which he was the father of Speculative Masonry. ‘They
are of the same value and essentially speaking this value is
nil. I conclude that, Rosicrucian or not, there is no evidence
for the awakening of the Rosy Cross in England under the
auspices of Elias Ashmole.

I pass now to the case of his contemporary, Thomas
Vaughan, and as I do not propose to retrace a ground
which I have travelled previously through its whole
length, I must either presuppose acquaintance with my
study of the Vaughan question or refer thereto.? On this

1 Sir Robert Moray, who was initiated in the North prior to Ashmole,
and was first President of the Royal Society, is called by Wood “a great
patron of the Rosicrucians.”

2 Tue Works or THomas Vaucnan: Eugenius Philalethes. Edited,
annotated and introduced by Arthur Edward Waite. Issued by the

372

-- Page 405 --
| The Awakening in England

i . . . .
understanding, let us make a beginning at the year 1650,
when the twin-brother of Henry Vaughan, called the
Silurist poet, issued two tracts in a minute volume, under the
pseudonym of Eugenius Philalethes. It follows that he
preceded Ashmole, and so far as I am directly aware he makes

~ . .
the first reference to the Rosy Cross in the English language
in England: It had been made previously in Scotland, so
far back—speaking comparatively—as the year 1638.2 In
the case of Vaughan his reference takes the form of a
dedication prefixed to his first tract, a “salutation from
the Centre of Peace” to the “regenerated Brethren
R..C..,” who are described otherwise as “elders of
election,” upright, noble and “ peaceable apostles of the
Church,” those, namely, “who behold in open day the
threefold record of the Spirit, the Water and the Blood.”
This is the judgment concerning them, more than thirty
years after they had ceased practically to testify on their
own part; and the dedication itself is prefixed, as I have
said, to a minute publication in England, far from the
German centre of the Rosy Cross, as if Vaughan took it for
granted that they could see with the eyes and hear with
ears of the spirit all the wide world over. But it may
Theosophical Publishing House for the Library Committee of the Theo-
sophical Society in the year 1919.

1 There is, however, an Essay on Spirit, referred to 1647 and described
as a scarce black letter tract, dedicated to John Locke. It is said by King in
Tue Gnostics, second edition, p. 398, to contain a Rosicracian Creed, of
which he gives three clauses. They are identical with the first three Magical
Aphorisms printed by Vaughan at the end of Lumen pz Luming, 1651. I
have failed to trace the Essay, but King derived from Edward Clarkson’s
Essay on THE SymBotic Evipences or THE Tempre Cuurcu, prefixed to
R. W. Billing’s Arcuirecruran ILtustraTions anp AcCOUNT OF THE
Tempte Cuurcu, 1838. It is an open question whether Vaughan repro-
duced his Aphorisms from the black letter tract or both from a common
source.

2 See Henry Adamson’s Muse’s Turenonia, in which are the well-known
lines :

For we are Brethren of the Rosie Cross.
We have the Masons’ word and second sight,
373

-- Page 406 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

be suggested alternatively that there were members or
emissaries in Britain and that he was acquainted with the
fact. We have seen that there is nothing to support this
view. In any case Thomas Vaughan lays the offering of his
tract, concerned with the nature of man and the state after
death, on the threshold of the House of the Holy Spirit,
not indeed as that which he would bring but as all that he
has. It is not to be regarded as a gift but as the homage of a
suppliant. It follows from the last words that it was also
a bid for initiation, and that there might be no needless
hindrance, in view of German adeptship, the dedication
is written in Latin.

So opened the life of Thomas Vaughan in the Hermetic
paths of literature, and nothing followed thereon, as if a
door swung back in hidden House or Temple to admit a
candidate. The author of AnrHRoposoPHiA ‘THEOMAGICA
and the little books that followed did not become a Brother
of the Rosy Cross. In a later publication he tells us that
he has “no acquaintance with this Fraternity as to their
persons ” and that no one should suppose in their dis-
traction that he belongs to the Order. He does not much
*‘ desire their acquaintance” and owns “no relation to
them,” though he is not a stranger to their doctrine, on the
basis of which he holds that they are “ masters of great
mysteries,” while recognising the amplitude of Nature,
in which respect they may receive as well as give, meaning
that other schools and other personalities might offer
instruction to them on lines distinct from theirs. “ It will
be expected perhaps that I should speak something as to
their persons and habitations, but in this my cold acquaint-
ance will excuse me.” It is so cold, however, that for the
fact of their existence, which he affirms, there is no better
evidence offered than that they write and publish books. It
is obvious therefore that Thomas Vaughan contributes
nothing to the history of the Order, but he marks a date

374

-- Page 407 --
The Awakening in England

in the English concern therein. The denials and affirmations
which I have quoted are drawn from the preface to the first
and only published translation of the Fama ET ConFEssio
Frarernitatis! in English, date 1652, or approaching
forty years after their appearance in Germany. ‘The
verston itself was not his own work but that of “ an unknown
hand,” and “the copy was communicated to me by a
gentleman more learned than myself.”?

It must be said that the Preface of Vaughan is far enough
from its presumed subject, but he institutes a parallel
between the Rosicrucian House of the Holy Spirit and that
clouded habitation on a hill where Apollonius of Tyana
visited the Indian Brotherhood, and in this connection he
offers the quotation already cited from Michael Maier, but
without naming the source. “I beheld ona day the Olympian
Towers shining by a certain stream and famous city, which
we have hallowed by the name of the Holy Spirit. I speak
of Helicon—or double-peaked Parnassus—wherein the steed
Pegasus opened a fountain of perennial water, flowing unto
this day. Therein Diana bathes; therewith are associated
Venus as a waiting-maid and Saturn as a patient client.
These are words which will say too much to those who
understand, but to the unversed little or nothing.” This,
I suppose, is the first time that any words of the German
Rosicrucian alchemist were put into an English vesture,
for Lusus Serrus and Tuemis Aurea had not as yet been
translated. As an illustration of doctrine, Vaughan

1 Tue Fame anp Conression oF THE FRraTERNiTy oF R. C., commonly, of
the Rostz Cross. With a Preface annexed thereto and a Short Declaration of
their Physical Work. By Eucznrus Puitatetugs. 1652. W. J. Hughan
displays his knowledge of Rosicrucian literature by thinking that the Fame
AnD Conression were “ written by Thomas Vaughan.”—Tue Rosrcrucian,
Vol. I, p. 9.

2 Tt is a miracle that occultists of the pseudo-Rosicrucian type have
not identified the unnamed “gentleman” with Elias Ashmole, whose
Tueatrum Cuemicum Brirannicum came out in the same year as THE
Fame anp ConFession.

375

-- Page 408 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

tells us that according to the Brotherhood, the Fire
and Spirit of God worked upon earth and water at
the beginning of things, extracting a pure and clear
substance, on which that Holy Spirit expressed its own
image, and so formed man. This “ clarified extract”
is the First Matter of Hermetic Philosophy, otherwise
a liquid, transparent salt, which is the minera of all
creatures; ‘‘and this Society doth acknowledge it to be
their very basis and the first gate which leads to all their
secrets.” It is a living water, in which there is a Divine
Fire, and that Fire is life. In the absence of all reference, I
am unable to verify the source of this reverie, but it speaks
the common language of Hermetic philosophy and is not
typically Rosicrucian in character.t

In earlier texts of Thomas Vaughan there are certain
direct quotations from Rosicrucian texts, and though
again they cannot be identified, they are important
on the spiritual side and both must be analysed at
length. The author of the first is presented as “ he
to whom the Brothers of R..C.. gave the title of
Sapiens and from whose writings they borrowed most of
their instructions to a certain German postulant.” The
extracts are in Latin and may be summarised in the follow-
ing terms: (1) Truth is the highest excellence and an im-
pregnable fortress, while it seems to be understood in the
text, not as an intellectual acquirement but as a state of
being, or in other words that the seeker becomes in its
attainment at once the good and the true: it is the
translation of truth into life. (2) In such fortress is con-
tained that Stone which is the Treasure of Philosophers,
and there should be no need to point out that here is a
complete separation of the Great Work, in the light of the

1 As stated already, I have not been able to trace a second issue of THE
Fame anp ConrFession, as edited by Vaughan, under the date of 1658, or
alternatively 1659, but it is mentioned by more than one writer.

376

-- Page 409 --
The Awakening in England

Rosy Cross, from any work in Chemia. (3) The matter of
this Stone is found everywhere, yet is scarcely discovered
by any ; it is precious to the wise and accounted vile by the
crowd ; it overcomes all and is itself overcome by nothing ;
it confronts us all, proclaiming with uplifted voice: “ I am
the Way of Truth.” (4) It transmutes dead stones into
Living Philosophical Stones, and is the true, rectifying
Medicine. (5) It stands night and day, knocking at the door
of conscience. (6) It is a fount of inexhaustible riches,
without money and without price, to those who are athirst
for truth and justice. (7) It is life and the light of men,
shining in the darkness within us, and is planted within
us by Him Who dwelleth in light inaccessible. (8) It
follows that within us and not without is that which we
seek in our folly without instead of within. (9) True
knowledge begins when the soul elects to be united with
the Higher Soul and the Eternal. (10) The body itself
is brought into the harmony of union, and there is effected
in this manner “ the philosophical transmutation of body
into spirit and of spirit into body,” which is the valid
process of the Mastery.t (11) Hereof is the gold of the
Philosophers, “ not that which is coined.” (12) But it is
also the Stone which is rejected. (13) The counsel of true
schooling is to know Heaven by Heaven, not by earth, and
earth itself by Heaven. (14) In Heaven, and so only, is

found the Incorruptible Medicine which sets free the body
from corruption and thus preservesit continually. (15) Thou

wilt never make out of others that one thing which thou

needest unless first there shall be made out of thyself that

one thing of which thou hast heard. (16) So is the counsel

brought to its last point and returns to its first imagery, the

1 This is a remarkable passage and should be taken in connection with

No. 14 in the present enumeration. They refer to the arch-natural body,

otherwise the body of adeptship, on which see my introduction to the

Works OF Tuomas VAUGHAN,

377

-- Page 410 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
impregnable tower or fortress, where shines the Sun of
Holiness and Justice, wherein is ‘‘ Philosophical Love.”
(17) Beyond it there is such a place as is scarcely reached by
mortals, “‘ unless they are raised by the Divine Will to the
state of immortality,” above all fear of death. (18) Who-
soever advances further than this state passes from the
sight of men into a “realm of abiding happiness,” filled
with “ perpetual joy.”

On the faith of this testimony Thomas Vaughan terms the
Rosy Cross “a most Christian and famous Society.”! Let
it be said on my own part that the voice of this witness is
perhaps greater than the voice of Fiudd, even in his most
inspired moments. The extract contains, as one may say,
in a nutshell the whole progress of the Christ-Life in man;
and if I leave the speaking parable at this point it is because
I must return thereto at the very end of our research. I
have said that the source of this extract is withheld. There
is, however,inthe pseudonymous Summum Bonvn of Joachim
Fritz that very curious letter described as addressed by
the Order to a certain German candidate for reception
and obtained by Fludd from a Polish friend at Dantzic.
To this I have referred previously. Compared with the
text which I have summarised, it is a poor and incoherent
performance, and has been so characterised by Dr. Craven,
but the notable point about it is that it reproduces almost
verbally many passages of the alleged Sapiens and is actually
the document to which Vaughan refers when introducing
his citations. It would serve no purpose to enumerate
the identities and analogies—as for example, regarding the
School of Philosophical Love and the conversion of dead into
Living Stones. But over and above these there are a few
points which may be drawn together, because if we are
justified in regarding the document as an official communi-

1 See Anima Macica Assconpita, p. 107 of my Works or THOMAS
Vaucuan, 1919.

378

-- Page 411 --
The Awakening in England
cation of the Order it is an indication of its mind prior to
1629, the unknown Sapiens himself of course anteceding any
date that can be ascribed to the epistle, which offers on its
own part no acknowledgments to place and time.

The Episrora in Summum Bonvm! affirms (i) that the
Fellowship of the Rosy Cross is with the Father and
Jesus, but this has been quoted already; (2) that it
walks in that Supreme Light which is God, according
to St. John; 3) that Jesus dwells in the vile body of
man; (4) that those who adhere to Him are with Him
made one spirit ; (5) that those who are alienated from God,
are in opposition to the Order, and hence it comes about
that “ we give not answer to all” ; (6) that its endeavour—
this notwithstanding—is to lead back lost sheep to the true
sheepfold ; (7) that the only light in which the Order is
manifested is the light of God and that ‘it is impossible for
thee to see us—unless of our own will—in another ” ; (8)
that the immovable palace of the Order is the centre of all
things ; (9) that Supreme Truth is a spark of fiery spirit,
“ dwelling in every created being,” purging, sustaining,
governing, an essential virtue; (10) that the work of the
novice is to adorn and beautify himself with “ sacramental
graces,” that the soul may enliven “the vile ashes and
vulgar body,” rendering it incorruptible and impassible
by the resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ; (11) that
unity in spirit with Christ is possible here and now, and so
also, even in this temporal state, “ will appear the glory
of the Lord and Jesus glorified’; (12) that this way is not

1 Compare Reghellini, who speaks of an analogy and bond of union
between the Rose-Croix of Germany and those of England and elsewhere.
He is not easy to follow but seems to think that there were mystical Rosi-
crucians, during the Wars of Religion, who wrote for the illumination of
humanity on pure Christian doctrine, as opposed to dogmatic intolerance,
There were several systems differing among themselves but one as to their
object and also as to the concealment of discoveries made in physical things,
for which reason recourse must bé had to emblems and allegories,

379

-- Page 412 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
“walked in through dying,” but is the way of conversion from
dead to Philosophical Stones and the way of Christ, shewn to
the favoured apostles on the Mount of Transfiguration.}:

On the faith of this document and the greater text from
which it draws, we can see as through a glass and darkly
how the Work of Spiritual Alchemy was understood in the
Rosy Cross, as against that which passed at the period
“under the name of Chymia,” or “the ungodly and
accursed gold-making,” set forth by many “ books and
pictures ” in contumeliam glorie Dei. ‘That it attained any
term in the mystery of the arch-natural body is another
question and beyond the scope of our research at this point :
it is sufficient to establish that it looked for the glory of
adeptship, manifested to inward eyes, through whatever
atmosphere of perfervid zealotry the vision was contem-
plated, as the exclamatory and disjointed language of the
communication suggests too well. I should add that the
German postulant, as Vaughan terms him, though addressed
as “‘ Worshipful and Honourable Sir” must have been at
least ou his probation, as the opening words speak of “the
first year of his nativity ” which can mean only his reception
into some circle of the Order, some threshold or gate of
initiation, however external. It is said to him also at the
end that “ these things the Lady Virtue hath commanded
should be told to thee ” and that he shall be “ more largely
taught ” hereafter—according to his deserts.

The second citation made by Thomas Vaughan purports
—like that of Fludd—to be another letter from the
Brothers of the Rosy Cross addressed to one chosen out of
thousands as worthy of some answer to his appeal for admis-
sion within their ranks.t_ His affirmed qualifications were
diligence in the study of Holy Scripture and zeal in quest

1 Tt is in reality drawn from Grunpiicuer Bericut von dem Vorhaben
Gelegenheit und Inhalt der Liblichen Bruderschaft, etc. 1617. This text has
been the subject of previous reference.

380

-- Page 413 --
ati, GETS, z
. e) aay)
ee Kas Gn fd bongs
Boe) By Pe ee foad Aor ee
2 BAT Nas
abt ane OA
BY WS Niferiyren te 3) fyi
a
Sie am BREE A uh ¢
BS By EO SEs ae Ke 28
ReeeeegeH en y if! ew
2 (SSR Bina) Be
ep yo ee Misi! pS |
any f ade? 4 IMA Peo) ee
aed So de gf Ne raat eA\ Pie  \@
gOS OR wire |) Medan ANE Tk A
Tk Bl eer EGA TAY
a ae I CSN eg
; f ee op ee iF, ean ate
~: Bia ate ie piece fot OY ae ii a
was SS NA As (9 Ae ees
a ls © OP" ee A * Sears Wye ES I
ale ba \e e, py \ io | ae ,
in Ae 0 OM < fal ‘ f ° a5
AU B: @ {hit ah
2 eee a: 2 std are alin
ERIN, S78 OP WANT \ea.- o> Saines
aes ae. (7A) \ hice at
Eee Be 4 Rao
BAe | Pea ae Wu’ Res
ee Po (GaN \S! eo
ea epee mee, OW NN ee
Pans oN ela ee Genk RT Riese
mp Me Re gee en LT tetas
FIG a A “PN
TEN) CM (ences
"one SS ea De ‘Sead iN
MONS PHILOSOPHORUM
To face page 380

-- Page 414 --
The Awakening in England

after true knowledge of God. There is firstly a kind of pre-
amble, containing a comment on the unworthy reception of
Fama Fraternitatis by those who looked for instruction on
the art of making gold, so that they might “ live pompously
in the face of the world,” and who “ brand us with infinite
calumnies ”” because nothing follows their demand. ‘The
truth is that no one looks for treasures in the place where
God has stored them up. It is hidden from most of the
world but not from those that are of God. The second
part describes an Invisible Mountain of the Wise and the
way to arrive thereat. (1) It is in the midst of the earth
or centre, at once far off and near, containing most ample
treasures, but such as the world does not value. (2) It is
reached only by a man’s toil and endeavour. (3) On a
certain night, described as most long and dark—compare
the “ Dark Night of the Soul ’’—the seeker shall set out
to find it, prayer being the preparation for his journey.
(4) A Guide will offer his service and shall be followed,
asking nothing of any man. (5) The Mountain shall be
reached at midnight—meaning when the dark night is
darkest. (6) On arrival thereat a great wind shall shake
the mountain and shatter its rocks to pieces. (7) The
adventurer will be attacked by “ lions, dragons and other
terrible beasts,”’ but the Guide will suffer no evil to befall
him. (8) The tempest will be followed by earthquake,
and in the destruction thereafter of the terrene rubbish
by fire the treasure will be discovered. (9) But it will not
become manifest till the night and its darkness are over,
or otherwise until the Day-star rises. (10) The treasure
includes “ a certain exalted Tincture, with which the world
—if it served God and were worthy of such gifts—might
be tinged and turned into most pure gold.” 1

1 Tue Rosicructan anp Masonic Recorp for March 15, 1875, prints
this Rosicrucian letter in full, without comment of any kind, and describes
it as translated by Kenneth Mackenzie. It compares unfavourably with
the antique and beautiful version of Thomas Vaughan.

381

-- Page 415 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

It is obvious that this is alchemy of parable, the gold of
Robert Fludd and the spiritual transmutation of the
unknown Sapiens. But the incoherent and confusing
text proceeds to affirm that if used as directed by the Guide
it will make the old young, and there shall be no disease
of the body. Moreover, “‘ by means of this Tincture you
shall find pearls of that excellency which cannot be imag-
ined.” It is like the doctrine of the kingdom presented in
the trade-terms of a cheap-jack; but I conceive that so
far as flesh is concerned, it is the Lord that raises up, while
the pearls are not marketable in any house of exchange,
though they are beyond price. In the view of Thomas
Vaughan this Invisible Mountain of the Wise is the Mount
of God and the mystical, philosophical Horeb; but
occultists would dwell upon the Rosicrucian use of the
term “magical” in connection therewith and would
regard the “ wild beasts ” as signifying that “‘ Dweller on
the Threshold ” which is the enemy to overcome by those
who would follow the path of occult practice. I know
only that in far later and—as I am sure—more condign
Mysteries of the Rosy Cross, the Secret Mountain, the
Mountain situated at the centre—that is to say, in the
midst of the earth—is clothed about with a greater grace
of symbolism, whether or not it contains a higher meaning.
In the seventeenth century German parable at its best
had by no means emerged from the uncouth forms and
manners of thought and language which were native to
the Meistersingers. We know therefore better where we
are when in the hands of the theosophist Sapiens, who
was not writing parable, than in those of presumed official
letter-writers of the Rosy Cross, addressing their German
or other postulants and neophytes.

In any case, Thomas Vaughan is the first English writer
who made known the Order and its claims in vernacular
language, apart from unprinted versions of Fama and

382

-- Page 416 --
The Awakening in England
Conressio. He represents therefore the awakening of the
subject. The publication of Fama and Conressio under his
auspices marked an epoch for those who came after him,
like John Heydon, or those who were in evidence con-
currently, like Elias Ashmole. I have shewn elsewhere
that he appeats to have been concerned largely on his own
part with what I have called the body of adeptship, and
he gives prominence, as we have seen, to citations from
Rosicrucian writers who seem to deal in the same subject,
in other words, the state of Enoch and Elias, “ who were
translated.”

I suppose that the Rosicrucian history of Thomas
Vaughan might be regarded as incomplete by a few persons
who are acquainted with the by-ways of modern occult
imposture if I did not refer briefly to the inventions of
Leo Taxil when he produced his mock conspiracy against
Freemasonry for the benefit of the Latin Church in France.
It was he who created Diana Vaughan, a “ Palladist ” of
perfect initiation, Grand Mistress of the Temple of Occult
Freemasonry and Grand Inspectress of the New and
Reformed Palladium, having its headquarters at Charleston,
U.S.A., under the supreme pontificate of Albert Pike.
It was devoted to the worship of Lucifer and the hierarchy
of lost angels, with whom it was in uninterrupted com-
munion by the aid of sorcery. Wealthy, beautiful and
highly placed, the Palladian Diana was a lineal descendant
of Thomas Vaughan, whose birth—for the purposes of
the mendacious story—is placed in 1612, or ten years
earlier than it occurred in fact. In 1636, at the age of
twenty-four years, he came out of Wales to London and
there entered into communication with Robert Fludd, by
whom he was received into the first Grade of the Rosi-
crucian Brotherhood. He obtained also a letter of intro-
duction to its Grand Master, Johann Valentin Andrez,
which he took over to Stuttgart and there presented it.

383

-- Page 417 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

In 1637 he returned to London and was present at the death
of Fludd, which occurred in that year. Being represented
throughout as identical with the pseudonymous alchemist
who is known as Eirenzus Philalethes,! and as using this
pseudonym in succession to that of Engenius, he is said
to have undertaken a first voyage to America ine 1638.
At this period he is described as a Puritan impregnated
with the secret doctrine of Robert Fludd. In 1640 he
made further progress in the Order of the Rosy Cross,
being advanced to the Grade of Apeptus Mrnor by Amos
Komensky. A year later he visited Italy and made acquaint-
ance with a fellow-alchemist, the well-known Berigard
de Pisa; but in reality the journey was undertaken as
a pious pilgrimage which testified his devotion to Faustus
Socinus, who was the actual founder of the Rosicrucian
Order. A little later on he is said to have been tarrying
in France, when he conceived the project of organising
Freemasonry in the speculative form under which it flour-
ishes at the present day. He returned to England, and with
this object in view he joined the Accepted Masons, some
of whom were Rosicrucians already, and among them he
set to work. In the year 1644 he presided over a Rosi-
crucian assembly at which Elias Ashmole was present, he
having entered the Order in 1640.

With the exception of Thomas Vaughan, it is to be

1 This piece of confusion is not only recurrent among old writers but is
characteristic also of several who in recent times lay claim on knowledge.
It is found persistently in Westcott’s tract on the Science or ALCHEMY ;
Kieswetter’s problematical collection of Order MSS. not only allows him to
make it but is his authority for so doing ; and Alexander Wilder, writing in
‘Tue THEosopuist, refers to Vaughan the experience of Eirenzus Philalethes
with a certain goldsmith to whom he had offered bars of precious metal
produced by alchemy—a story recited in An Open ENTRANCE To THE CLOSED
Patacr or rue Kine. Finally, Wilder and C. W. King, in Tu Gnostics
AND THEIR Rematns, both appeal to an unnamed writer of the year 1749 in
support of a story that Thomas Vaughan was then living at Nuremberg and
was President of the Illuminated in Europe according to Wilder but
throughout the world according to King.

384

-- Page 418 --
The Awakening in England
understood that all the personalities mentioned so far in
the narrative were addicted to the cultus of Lucifer as
the true god, and in the year 1645 Vaughan himself made
a blood-offering to Satan, who appeared in response to
an evocation and with whom he concluded a compact,
receiving the Philosopher’s Stone and a guaranteed period
of mundane existence extending to some twenty-two
years from the alleged date. ‘Thereafter he was to be trans-
ported without dying into the Kingdom of Lucifer, to
live with a glorified body in the pure flames of the heaven
of fire. It was subsequent to this undertaking that he
wrote the Open Entrance To THE Ciosep PaLAcE OF THE
Kring. Moreover, he collaborated with Ashmole over the
institution of Symbolical Masonry and the composition
of the Craft Rituals. In the year 1646 he paid another
visit to America, and there on a certain cloudless night of
a New England summer he entered into a marriage-union
with Venus Astarte, who came down on a crescent-moon
to earth. The fruit of these nuptials was a daughter, who
was consigned to'the care of an Indian tribe, and from her
in fine descended the Diana of the French memoirs.
Astarte returned to the skies, while Thomas Vaughan
placed the broad ocean between himself and the scene of
his amours. In 1650 he began to issue the alchemical
writings which pass under the name of Eugenius Philalethes,
and four years later he succeeded Andrez as Grand Master
of the Rosicrucian Order. Between this date and the year
1667, which was that of his translation to the paradise of
Lucifer, he issued his later Hermetic tracts under the
pseudonym of Eirenzus Philalethes. He was succeeded
by John Frederick Helvetius, whom he had introduced
to the Rosy Cross. Such is the secret history and informal
romance of Thomas Vaughan, as certified by his lineal
descendant, Diana Vaughan of Louisville, on the faith of
family papers. But Diana and all her dossier were invented
2c 385

-- Page 419 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
by Leo Taxil, as in the last resource he admitted coram
publico.

The last genuine Rosicrucian episode which connects with
the name of Thomas Vaughan is unknown to all his bio-
graphers and arose out of his edition of the Fama and
Conressio in English. It prompted two, interesting
aspirants towards the benefits and consolations of the Order
to make a formal application for admission in a printed
letter, after the manner of those who had preceded them
earlier in the seventeenth century. Their identities were
veiled under the sacramental names of Theodosius Verax
and Theophilus Czlnatus,! and as their communication
appeared apart from date or place, but presumably in
England, I conceive that not even the Brotherhood of the
Rosy Cross in the sanctuaries or crypts of their House of
the Holy Spirit had taken better pains to place themselves
out of reach. Such precautions may have commended
them to the Order and yet the Invisibles par excellence
may have failed to find them out, unless there was help
from the Rota. Perhaps in this case that “ sacred voice ”
which assured and consoled the postulants was true as
well as sacred and they found that which they desired,
“by the grace of God.” ? The memorial contains nothing

1 Compare the dedication of Miaier’s Preface to Themis Aurea, men-
tioned in my note on p. 329.

2 The text of the communication is as follows: An EpisTLE To THE
Rosicrucitan Fraternity. To the Most Perfectly United, Most Eminent,
Most Wise and True Philosophers and Brothers R.’.C.’. Theodosius Verax
and Theophilus Celnatus wish Health and Peace—We have no small
comfort in beholding those things of which the possession itself would be
unlawful. Ambition does oftentimes proceed by impulse where we on our
own part should be afraid to go. We seek now to exalt ourselves, supported
both by piety and your candour, as it were with wings, above sordid envy
and ignorance. Whatsoever judgment ye may form concerning us must be
to our profit. If favourable, we shall enjoy shortly an easy boon ; but if
harsh, the greater our necessities are the better will be the opportunity of
benevolence. While we are considering seriously how philosophy has been
corrupted by the schools and produces daily more dread monsters than Africa

386

-- Page 420 --
The Awakening in England
of particular importance, but it is notable as (1) the only
direct application for admission made by aspirants in
England, though one of an implied or indirect kind will
be found—as we have seen—in Thomas Vaughan’s dedica-
tion of AnTHRoPposopHiaA THEOMAGICA in 1650, while
there is also anything that can be inferred from Fludd’s
epistle to the Fraternity appended to his Apotocia Com-
PENDIARIA and T'racratus Apo.oceticus; (2) the very
last that was made by any postulant in any country and
language ; (3) an addition to our bibliographical knowledge
concerning Thomas Vaughan, and everything that can be
gleaned respecting him is of moment not only to the
mystical and occult activities in England of the seventeenth
century but to the history of English literature during
the Protectorate.
Contemporary with Thomas Vaughan, but a little later
herself, we begin to feel terrified. Aristotle and others of his school have
compelled our philosophy to become a mere servant of its own glory,
recognising no truth but their proper inventions. We do not deplore the
loss of so many secret writings which having perished in the fire did only at
their destruction shew signs of brilliancy. Truth is naked ; it wears not any
mask and, incapable of deceit itself, uncovers false persons. ‘Those who
pursue truth not only reach the goal but leave a track behind which may be
followed by others, For our own part, unless we receive assistance, old age
will overtake us and yet we shall be no further than the threshold. Neverthe-
less, we prefer to die seeking the goal rather than yield to shameful idleness.
We will accordingly, O most prudent men, continue in earnest desire,
looking towards you in whom our help lies. We are conscious sufficiently of
our weakness and we seek therefore a remedy. The gentle ray of your
humanity has animated our sterile hopes and encouraged the vintage-song.
Where others finished have ye begun. Pardon us, most excellent men, if we
speak of those things whereof we are still ignorant. Whatsoever is brought
forth into the light under your auspices is deserving of praise. We believe
that your book is so much what we need that it might have been written for
us alone; we recognise that no ordinary providence has taken us from
cimmerian darkness and placed us in a twilight which will be flooded shortly
by the rising day. We are not of those conceited Peripatetics who swear by
Aristotle, while their books swarm with stupidities. Your philosophy, O
most learned men, is not full of kindred absurdities. It displays the greatest
secrets in light, and the darkness which blinds most men has sharpened your
own eyesight. Furthermore, it is modest and truly learned, and—having
387

-- Page 421 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
in respect of his published writings, there is John Heydon,
who was a kinsman of Sir Christopher Heydon, well enough
known, if not overmuch esteemed among English astrologers
of the period. He was of the Lilly and Gadbury contingent
and, I believe, of no vital consequence to tke speculative
science of the stars, though not without bibliographical
importance among progenitors of ephemerides and horary
handbooks. I suppose that John Heydon is the proto-
typical thief of English occult literature. It was a free
world in those days in the matter of author’s rights, for
there was no protection of any kind and no way of redress.
As if he carried some libertine’s charter, Heydon stole
from everyone, and perhaps from his contemporaries
fallen from heaven—derives its origin from the Holy Scriptures, wherein
nothing is suspicious or erring. Whoever studies these writings will arrive at
a knowledge of that Matter from which all that lives has been derived.
Those who persistently deny that there are men whom God has elected to a
knowledge of the intimate mysteries suspect the solicitude of the Creator,
Who withholds nothing useful or necessary. He Who fabricated the whole
machine of the universe for the human race willed—both for His own glory
and our benefit—that His works should be understood. There is, however,
no profit in mere study without light from God. Therefore, as God—thrice
excellent and most great—created the light wherein all creatures flourish,
so a light was kindled over the chaos of letters; a great cosmos has been
produced; heaven has descended to earth; and—the superficies being
removed—the centre itself comes into view; while, if we spoke of even
greater things, there are some from whom the meaning would not be hidden.
For we have good reason to believe that there is a true Society—your own—
unto which God has revealed the oracles. It is much more probable that He
would discover such mysteries to His Church than to the heathen, and
those who possess Divine Truth are not likely to be ignorant of Nature’s
secrets. Ye also are few and wise, while the multitude is rude and hurtful ;
and wise Nature has hidden her treasures deeply, that they may not become
common. In like manner, art hath also its penetralia: its gems are to be
sought, its gold is to be dug up, and the divine operation is an assistant in
the investigation of both. Your Fama—translated into the English tongue—
has come into our hands, being edited with a preface by the illustrious
gentleman, E. P. Therein ye have invited worthy persons to join your
Society—but hence, ye profane! Meanwhile a bitter strife has risen up
amongst us, because we are well aware that we deserved not so great a
blessing; and yet our weakness gave way before your favour, and we
388

-- Page 422 --
The Awakening in England
especially, with unblushing assiduity. The victims included
Thomas Vaughan himself, Sir Thomas Browne, Elias
Ashmole and Bacon. There can be very little question
that he helped himself in like manner from the stores of
anterior Latin occult writers, but as in that direction he had
an illimitable poacher’s ground it would be difficult to
follow in his tracks, as well as unproductive in consequence,
for his proclivities in these matters are notorious and beyond
dispute. His English piracies are complicated by the fact
that he altered his authors to suit his purpose at the
moment, which was usually one of mendacity and the
kind of imposture which exposes itself on the open surface
of the tale. For example, he took Bacon’s ArLantis
rejoiced at being thus overcome. Another difficulty, notwithstanding,
appeared presently, concerning where or to whom we shall apply, and we
were plunged again into sadness. ‘There was no comfort in the conviction of
your wisdom and benevolence if we could not reach you. But in the silence
which followed a sacred voice assured us that the Fraternity we desired so
anxiously we should find at length by the grace of God. We have therefore
cast away fear and again breathe hopefully. Mere gold-seekers have doubtless
inquired after you, and so also have the votaries of pleasure, whose brains
have turned into a belly, while they apply arts to their orgies. But we have
followed on the path of Mercury. There are many also who are given over
to much writing, who discourse of the Elixir and the Panacea in an enig-
matic manner, purposing deception, while others coming after them have
pretended to find therein what the writers themselves did not know. Let us
not be considered thoughtless who have scorned the promises of psuedo-
philosophers, that we might give ourselves to truth. Those versed in
Nature’s secrets are taciturn: they do not write much or attractively.
Hence little can be gained from books, which are less means of instruction
than of mental confusion. We ask you therefore to take pity on us; we are
still young men and novices, as our nervous epistle indicates ; but perhaps an
elder mind has been infused into us. As regards religion, we believe in the
Creator God and recognise Him in His works. We smile at all which you have
said concerning the Pope: that religion—if so it can be called—will be
involved in the same ruin as other sects and heresies. We trust that
there are no other obstacles which separate us from your Society: we ask
much, but it is within your power. Pardon us, most loving brethren, if with
open arms we seem to force ourselves upon you; and if our desire in itself
be pleasing to you, may there be no difficulty from the length of this our
epistle.

389

-- Page 423 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
bodily but called it A Voyacr To THE Lanp oF THE Rost-
crucians and varied the text throughout, as if he himself
had visited the Order at its headquarters and was authorised
to unveil its mysteries. These peccadilloes notwithstanding,
it was the custom in Victorian days for occyJtists belonging
to the MacGregor Mathers type to affirm that Heydon
“knew something ”—as for example, no doubt, in respect
of geomancy or other purlieus on the threshold of irre-
deemable folly, some deeps of which they had sounded on
their own part.

Subject to all his deviations, which in the impression
they produce at this day are not without a touch of comedy,
Heydon’s contribution to the matter of the Rosy Cross in
Commonwealth England and later may be brought within
a small compass. It incorporates also a medley of stolen
goods. (1) The father of Rosicrucians was Moses, though
according to some opinions they belong to the Order of
Elias or are followers of Ezekiel, while for Heydon him-
self they ‘“‘have been since Christ.” (2) They are
seraphically illuminated, like Moses, and possess not
only a great power in working miracles, but can be
transported wherever they please, while they can assume
any shape, like Proteus. (3) They stay the plague in
cities, silence tempests, calm the rage of the sea, pass
through the air, countercheck the powers of witchcraft
and cure all diseases. (4) They are truly inspired and are
comparable to Aholiab and Bezaleel, who were filled with
the Spirit of God, as Moses testifies. (5) The sum and
essence of their teaching is that the perfection of a virtuous
soul resides in the accomplishment of her own nature in
true wisdom and Divine Love. (6) Heydon himself,
according to his plain statement, was neither a physician
nor a member of the Rosicrucian Order, and he pillages
Thomas Vaughan in his eagerness to deny the suggestion ;
yet he is in a position to discover their Temples, Holy

399

-- Page 424 --
The Awakening in England

Houses, Castles and Invisible Mountains. (7) It comes
about for this reason that the Governor of the House of
Strangers in the New Artantis is made to describe himself
in Heydon’s mendacious version as “a Christian priest
of the Order of the Rosy Cross” and that the mysterious
City of Damcar mentioned in Fama Fraterniratis is
said to be on the eastern side of Bacon’s Island of Apanna.
(8) Like some other literary impostors, Heydon had a
short memory and, previous affirmations notwithstanding,
represents that “‘ Order or Society which we call the Temple
of the Rosy Cross” as having been founded at Apanna
some nineteen hundred years previously by a king who had
reigned therein. (9) Its warders at the period of the story
were possessors of the Boox M -., though according to the
Fama it was treasured in the German Fatherland. (10) So
much for pretended headquarters, a place “in God’s
bosom, a land unknown ”—as Bacon described his island.
(11) But the Order was also in England—according to
another account of Heydon—and abode in the West
Country, where the Brethren had power to renew their
youth. (12) I do not know what author has been taxed
for the account of their Castle ;? but we hear of its rich
halls, its chambers of white marble, its pillars of jasper,
its pavements of fine amber and lintels of emeralds. (13)
We hear also of rich hangings, benches of white ivory,
beds garnished royally and presses containing gowns of
cloth of gold and mantles furred with sable. (14) There
was in fine a vault which was “ bigger than that in Ger-
many ” and was lighted after the same miraculous manner,
“as though the sun in the midst of the day had entered
in at ten windows,” and yet the building was “ seven score
steps underground.” (15) But as regards the mysteries
of the Castle we are told only of the banqueting hall,

1 In some of the details it recalls the Rosicrucian Epistle issued by F. G.
Menapius on July 15, 1617. See Chapter IX, p. 247.

391

-- Page 425 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
which provided a feast like that of the Holy Graal on the
earthly side of its ministry, for there was “ all manner of
meat in the world,” as well as golden flagons, garnished with
precious stones and filled to the brim with wine. (16) It is
said that this castle was built of crystal, painted with gold
and azure, while all things past, present and to come were
inscribed on the walls, together with recipes for the
diseased, characterised as golden medicines. (17) In fine
the pavement was strewn with roses and sweet smelling
herbs, ‘‘ above all savours in the world.” (18) Heydon
concludes his story by another theft, this time from
Michael Maier, perhaps through Vaughan: it gives
expression to his desire for the place and to live therein.

These gleanings are chiefly from Heydon’s version of the
New Arttiantis,! but his account of the Rosicrucians in
England is in Tue Rosie Crucian INFALLIBLE AXIOMATA
(1660) which—howsoever compiled—is an exceedingly
curious text and contains some further notable fictions
belonging to our subject. I pass over a garbled version of
the traditional history concerning Christian Rosy Cross,
for which Heydon no doubt depended on the Fama trans-
lation edited by Thomas Vaughan. (1) The Order is said
to inhabit the suburbs of heaven, and its Brethren are
“* officers of the generalissimo of the world,” even as “ the
eyes and ears of the great King, seeing and hearing all,
things ”—this being stolen from Henry More the Platonist,
who is speaking of beneficent genii. (2) The happiness
which they esteem above all is the gift of healing and of
medicine. (3) But a long time, great labour and travail
preceded the attainment of this their chief bliss. (4)
They were at first poor gentlemen, the humble students
of God and Nature. (5) Their infallible axioms purge the

1 It is found in his preface to Tur Hoty Guine, leading the way to the
Wonder of the World, etc. 1662. The said preface includes also a theft from
Sir Thomas Browne.

392

-- Page 426 --
The Awakening in England

mind from errors and render it divine, teaching us so to
iabour in this life that the excellency of the mental part
may be saved from all degeneration. (6) It is said that the
Rosicrucians are acquainted with those angels and spirits
which are empowered to rule over numbers. (7) They pay
especial attention to the number four, as if it had been
like a seal set upon them by God. (8) They deliver charms
against devils and their bonds, against diseases and so
forth. (9) A certain Theophilus Fullwood, either at that
time or recently a resident in England, is described as
a Brother of the Rosy Cross. (10) His familiarity with
Daimones Metallict and Guardian Genii is affirmed by
Heydon. (11) Among Rosicrucians of the past there was
Pherecydes Syrus, who was acquainted with Fauni and
Sylvani, being moreover the master of Pythagoras.

Much of the pretended information here summarised
is reproduced in Tue Hoty Guipe. Heydon’s next publica-
tion was a treatise on geomancy, disguised by a magnificent
title.t It describes in its first chapter the manner of pro-
jecting a figure according to Rosicrucian rule, but about
the Order itself there are no further statements. THEo-
MaGIA was followed by a treatise on the Harmony oF THE
Wortp *# which claims to unfold the Art of preparing
Rosicrucian Medicines, but otherwise there is no informa-
tion, real or alleged.? It may be mentioned, however,

1 Turomacia, or the Temple of Wisdom, In Three Parts: Celestial,
Spiritual and Elemental, 1662-4.

2 Tur Harmony or tHE WorxD, being a Discourse wherein the Phenomena
of Nature are consonantly salved and adapted to Inferior Intellects. By John
Heydon, Gent. ®Aovoyos, a Servant of God and Secretary of
Nature. 1662.

3 There was an earlier volume entitled A New Meruop or Rosicrucian
Puysic, 1658. It speaks of Mr. Walfoord and T. Williams, who performed
miracles in his presence and were Rosicrucians “by election’; of himself
as not of the Order; of the “ Rosicrucian physic? which he met with in
Arabia ; of the Brethren in England, who taught him “ excellent predictions
of astrology,” were learned in the signatures of plants and the secret

393

-- Page 427 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

that the preface admits his debt to other writers in a
manner which condemns him further. ‘I have bor-
rowed no man’s authority,” he assures his readers, “ but
such as is eminent and quotations I have left out purposely,
because I am not controversial. ... Besides I do not
profess myself a scholar.” His dedication to the Duke
of Ormond is largely a theft from Vaughan and very
curious as illustrating an anxiety to avoid controversy.
So also the opening part of his preface and much else therein
is pirated from Lumen pe Luminez. I pass over THE Wisz
Man’s Crown ? because its Rosicrucian materials are repro-
duced from Heydon’s previous works ; while his next two
publications ? contain nothing to our purpose. But in
1665 he issued THe Rostcrucian Crown,? in the Epistle
Dedicatory of which he describes the philosophy of the
Order as (1) to know God Himself ; (2) to pass into Him
“by a whole image of likeness” ; whereby (3) we may be
transformed and made as God. It is probably stolen goods,
but I have not identified the source. He says also, else-
where in the book, (1) that the Rosicrucians exact an oath of
silence, “‘ with a certain terrible authority of religion ”—
as if there were a heavy penal clause ; (2) that this precedes
the initiation of Candidates into the “ Arts of Astronomy,
Geomancy and Telesmatical Images”; (3) that the dead
are raised to life by means of these ; (4) that the Brethren
mysteries hidden in their seeds; of baths of wine, which served vitalising
in place of food; and of his kinsman Sir Christopher Heydon, who was “a
seraphically illuminated Rosicrucian ” as well as a learned astrologer.

1Tue Wisz Man’s Crown, or the Glory of the Rosy Cross... . With
the full Discovery of the True Catum Terr or First Matter of the Phil-
osophers. ... With the Recto Lucis and Holy Household of Rosicrucian
Philosophers. 1664.

2 Ex Havarguna, or the English Physician’s Tutor in the Astrobolisms of
Metals Rosicrucian, 1665, and A Quinturte Rosicrucian Scource, for the
due correction of . .. George Thomson. 1665.

3 Hammecuren Hampaanean, or the Rosicrucian Crown, set with Seven
Angels, Seven Genii, etc. 1665.

394

-- Page 428 --
The Awakening in England

of the Order change and amend bodies, prolong life, renew
youth, make dwarfs grow into the stature of tall men,
communicate wisdom and virtue to fools and madmen ;
(5) that they insure good fortune in play, lawsuits, love and
warfare, as also in commerce and maritime expeditions ;
(6) that in fine they know all things and “ resolve all manner
of questions, present and to come.” It is the Rosy Cross
in the ashpits, proclaimed by an itinerant quack who is
also something of a buffoon. And yet I suppose that there
is nothing more curious in the annals of occult literature
than the output of Eugenius Theodidactus, taken as a
whole. He is remarkable for the great heaps of his rubbish,
swept in from far and near, with a few stars glittering
oddly in the dust-heaps. He is curious even in his thieveries
and in the adaptation of his stolen goods.

It follows that John Heydon is in no sense a witness to
the Rosy Cross in England, either as to the fact of its
existence as one who presented its claims, at whatever
value, or made commentary on its doctrine and theosophy,
whether it were possible or not to accept or tolerate his views.
Such as we may hold it to be, the evidence began and ended
with Robert Fludd. After his mortal remains were carried,
as we have seen, from Coleman Street to Bearsted, if there
was anything at work in the hiddenness it did not emerge
therefrom, not even as Speculative Freemasonry. I have
made in this manner what may be termed a complete
clearance, a considerable number of lying witnesses being
driven out of court, carrying with them the baggage of
their mischievous or idle fictions. ‘Thomas Vaughan was
not an Imperator of the Order ; Elias Ashmole mentioned
it on two occasions only and then in a manner which
shewed no acquaintance with the subject ; William Back-
house may or may not have discovered the First Matter of
the physical universe or of the Philosopher’s Stone, but he
is no more likely, in view of the facts before us, to have been

395

-- Page 429 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

a brother of the Secret Order than any of the occult rag-
fair who frequented the Astrologer’s Feast. And the
seventeenth century died in the arms of its successor,
during the whole course of which no one remembered
Fludd, while it is exceedingly difficult to find even a casual
reference to the Rosy Cross in any branch whatsoever of
English literature till the High Grades of Masonry began
to drift over from France and to be worked in this country,
unobtrusively for the most part and only here and there.
The sole evidential English Rosicrucianism of the eighteenth
century is the imported Grade of Rose-Croix, the place
and import of which will be a subject of consideration later.

It remains to add that Heydon had autobiographical
moods, of which the benefit remains with us in some of his
writings. I conceive that they are largely mendacious and
are certainly in a thief’s setting, for in the course of his
story he levies contributions as usual from there and here,
like reflections to relieve the discourse. For want of other
sources, the biographical dictionaries, late and early, have
depended chiefly on himself, nor am J in a better position,
and it would be of little consequence if research could
carry the subject further. J summarise therefore from
available sources briefly : (1) John Heydon belonged to the
Devonshire branch of the Norfolk stock which bore this
name and the fact establishes his kinship with the astrologer,
Sir Christopher Heydon, already mentioned. (2) He was
born at Green Arbour, London, in the house of his father,
who was Francis Heydon of Sidmouth, the mother being
Mary Chandler, described as of Worcestershire. (3) The
date of his birth was September 10, 1629, according to his
own statement. (4) The same authority tells us that he was
educated somewhere in Worcestershire. (5) When the
civil war broke out he claims to have joined the King’s army
and to have commanded a troop at Edgehill, being then
about fifteen years of age, on the basis of his birth-story.

396

-- Page 430 --
The Awakening in England

(6) He went abroad in 1651 but was in England in the follow-
ing year and began to study for the law. (7) Even by his
own account he could have obtained a mere smattering,
but in 1655 he was practising at Clifford’s Inn, combining
professional business, if any, with the casting of nativities.
(8) He is said to have been intimate with all astrologers of
the Restoration, including Lilly and Gadbury, both of
whom he vilified. (9) On August 4, 1656, it is on record
that he married the widow of Nicholas Culpeper, the well-
known herbalist. (10) About and after this date he seems
to have been frequently in prison. (11) His books were
burnt and he was committed to Lambeth House for two
years, by order of the Lord Protector, Heydon’s explanation
being that he had foretold the date of Cromwell’s death by
hanging. ‘The false prophet and his memorials on the art
of divination naturally suffered together. (12) A rumour
that he was putting treasonable matter into the hands of
printers secured him a shorter term in 1663. (13) In the
year following he suffered imprisonment for the common
failing of debt. (14) In 1667 he was accused of being
concerned in a conspiracy to seize the Tower of London,
but he protested his innocence, affirming that he was the
victim of false witnesses hired to inform against him.
(15) This is the last record that I have met with concerning
John Heydon, the date of whose death is unknown. His
compilations-are excessively rare and would form altogether
a most curious miscellaneous collection, though dregs and
lees enough for the better part, the penny-dreadfuls of
occult literature. He is self-described on his title-pages as
“‘ 4 Servant of God and Secretary of Nature.” So far as his
books are concerned, the service might have been more
honoured in suspension than observance, and I think that
Domina Natura must have dismissed her scribe at an early
stage of his proceedings.

It remains to mention the curious collection of Rudd

397

-- Page 431 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

MSS. in the British Museum, Harleian, Nos. 6481-6.
According to Kenneth Mackenzie, following the texts
themselves, Rudd belonged to the West of England
“and there is very little known concerning him,” which
notwithstanding Mackenzie affirms that he was a “ mystic
and quietist,” denominations which his extant remains
by no means justify. The bulk of the collection belongs
to Peter Smart, Master of Arts, and was made up in
the years 1712~14, but he describes nearly all the tracts
as those of Dr. Rudd. In one place he mentions
“an ancient manuscript” of this person, adding that it
has been methodised by himself. In the absence of all
knowledge otherwise there is only one fact which emerges
clearly, namely, that the Rudd activities, in so far as he was
not Smart’s alter ego, are not earlier than the close of the
seventeenth century, some of his materials coming from
Vaughan and Heydon. What he left behind him was
copies of printed books, and as the six volumes are not all in
the same hand but in one also which seems to be older, it is
possible that some sections are in his autograph. Asummary
analysis of their. contents will exhibit the limits of their
Rosicrucian character and claims, which have been ex-
aggerated in certain quarters.

Haru. 6481. I. This is called Dr. Rudd’s Treatise oF
THE Mrracutous Descensions AND AscENSIONS OF SPIRITS,
verified by a practical examination of Principles in the Great
World. It opens with a so-called Vision of Dr. Rudd in an
orchard at Sidmouth in Devonshire and is actually Vaughan’s
account of his experience with Beata at the beginning of
Lumen ve Lumines. Whether mystic or quietist therefore,
we see that Dr. Rudd belongs to the Heydon School of
piracy, and indeed his garbled version reflects Heydon’s
“encounter” with the Spirit Euterpe rather than the
original. The sections which follow are: (1) Of the
Sympathetical Concord of the Macrocosm with the Micro-

398

-- Page 432 --
The Awakening in England

cosm, being a Discourse of Divine Names, Angels and
Sephiroth, the whole, as it is said, Christianised. (2) Of the
nature of God and spirits. (3) The Macrocosm and
Microcosm. (4) Harmony of the Great World. (5) The
Motion and Harmony of the Heavens and Planets as the
Work of Angels. (6) The Harmony of Planetary Aspects.
(7) Of Seminal Forms, the Souls of Brutes and the Soul of
Man. (8) How Virtues are impressed by the Influence of
Heaven, Stars and Planets, shewing Geomantic Figures and
Seals of Spirits. (9) How Genii are united to their Vehicles.
(10) The Harmony of the Microcosm. (11) The chief
Seat of the Soul. I]. The Harmony of the Microcosm,
called otherwise the Second Part. (1) The nature and
composition of Man. (2) Medicines to prolong life. (3)
The separation of the Soul from the body. (4) Political
Order and Laws of Air Demons. (5) The Bodies of the
Dead. Here ends Harl. 6481, both divisions being dated
1714. I do not pretend to identify all their unacknowledged
sources, but a great deal is derived through the Heydon
channels from Cornelius Agrippa, from the forged Fourth
Book of his PuitosopHia Occutta, from Petrus de Abano
and the early Grimoire-makers.

Hart. 6482. The general title is Tasuta Sancra cum
Tasutis Enocu1 and the several sections follow. (1)
Characters of the Sixteen Figures of Geomancy, expressed
in the Greater and Lesser Squares of Tabula Sancta:
compare Hart. 6481, Pt. I, §9. (2) The Seven Tables of
Enoch, corresponding to the Planets. (3) The Shema-
hamphoras. (4) The Names of Good and Evil Spirits,
according to the Seven Tables of Enoch. (5) Dr. Rudd’s
Nine Hierarchies of Angels, with their Invocations to
Visible Appearance. (6) The Olympic Spirits. The first
four sections are in another and older hand, their sources
being referable to Casaubon’s Farrurut Rexation, the
other Dee MSS. not included therein, the so-called

399

-- Page 433 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
Lesser Key or SoLomon THE Kinc and Cornelius Agrippa :
they include an account of Elementary Spirits. The prime
source of the fifth section is, of course, the CELESTIAL
Higerarcuy of Pseudo-Dionysius, but the Rudd codex
derives from debased magical and especially Goétic versions.
After two “ introductions ” there follow certain Keys or
* Provocations”” and then “the Nine Great Celestial
Keys,” otherwise Angelic Invocations, including that of
Metatron, the Kabalistic Angel of the Presence, illustrated
by elaborate “Seals of the Angels.” This section claims to
be Smart’s transcript and is dated July, 1712. The source
of the sixth section is De Macia VETERUM, under the name
ArBaTEL, first printed in 1575.

Hari. 6483. The general title is Linzer Matorum
Spirituum, seu Go#tia, comprising the Krys or SoLomon,
the Apmapet and Ars Nororia. The sources are therefore
familiar, and I need add only that the sections are full of
Seals and Diagrams, excellently drawn. Haru. 6484.
Tue TALISMANIC SCULPTURE OF THE Persians. This depends
from the English translation of Gaffarel’s CuriosTEz
Inovyes, first published in 1629. Haru. 6485 is a very
curious volume, the general title of which is Rostcructan
Secrets: their Excellent Method of Making Medicines
of Metals, also their Laws and Mysteries.1 The date is
March 12, 1713, presumably that of completion. The text
is alchemical as far as folio 352 and draws much from
Heydon. The Virutus Aureus of Helvetius follows as a
letter to Dr. Dee and then an extract from the AMPHITHEs-
trum of Heinrich Khunrath. On folio 370 there is a
citation from Helmont. The next item is called Cxavis
Cuymicus and purports to explain “ hard words ” in the
writings of Dr. Dee: in reality it is a short alchemical
lexicon. The last section is called the Laws and Mysteries

1 In the corner of the title-page are these unaccountable words: “The
first sheet Dr. Dee.”

400

-- Page 434 --
The Awakening in England

of the Rosicrucians, for which see the English translation
of Maier’s THemis Aurea Haru. 6486. The title is
Hermetis Trismecistr : Sponsatia CELEBerrima. The
Famous Nuptials of the Thrice-Great Hermes, allegorically
describing the Mystical Union and Communion of Christ
with every Regenerate Soul. Composed by C..R.., a
German of the Order of the Rosie Cross about 255 years
past, and from the Latin MS. faithfully translated into
English by Peter Smart, Master of Arts, 1714. Notwith-
standing its title, there was never a Latin edition of
Nuptim Cuymic# and English is the sole language into
which [I can trace its translation from the original German.
The inference is that Smart as a false witness isin the category
of Heydon and Rudd. The version which he used is that
of the English translation by E. Foxcroft, published in 1690.
On the reverse of the title it is said that in the margin are
brief notes by the late Dr. Rudd, explaining some hard
words and sentences, but they are the marginalia of the
English rendering and these derive in their turn from the
German text. This additional and gratuitous mendacity
suggests that Rudd is a figment of the brain of Smart.
The cryptic figures of Tue Cuemicat Nuptians are
reproduced and of course are not decoded. At the end
there is a Table summarising the episodes of the romance,
but nothing appears to justify the mystical meaning
ascribed to it in the title. As a contribution to Rosicrucian
literature, I conclude that the Rudd MSS. might be com-
mended to the notice of the American Rosy Cross in some
of its developments as an early example of its own dis-
positions in the art of occult fraud.

1 As regards the third Law of the Fama which—according to the Rudd
transcript— enjoins each Brother to appear on a particular day at a certain
place every year, that they may meet all together and consult about their
affairs,” there is no mention of Dzes C but it is suggested that the place of
gathering is spiritual, and Maier’s remarks follow concerning Olympic
Houses, Helicon and Parnassus.

2D 401

-- Page 435 --
CHAPTER XIV

GERMAN ROSICRUCIANISM IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY
Wuen John Heydon carried his weakling voice and his
principles of petty piracy over the visible border, the Rosy
Cross as presented to the mind of Fludd and reflected
faintly—in almost casual references—scattered through
the texts of Vaughan, appears, on the surface at least, to
have fallen asleep once more in England, even as the
Figurative Master of its Legend slept in the House of the
Holy Spirit during that mystical period of one hundred
and twenty years. What I have called the awakening in
this country was perhaps rather a stirring in dream. So
also in Germany, if there was activity in any of the Houses
there was practically no echo in the world without. The
occasional reproduction of an old text alone excepted, the
written word, like the voice of rumour, was nowhere
abroad in the land.?

1 For the sake of an accuracy to which no consequence attaches it may be
noted that a Salzbourg physician, named Adam Lebenswald published in
1680 Acut TRACTATLEIN VON DES TEuFeLS List unD Berrue etc, and that the
fourth of these eight treatises on the guile and imposture of the devil was
concerned with the claims and traditional history of the Rosy Cross,
regarded as fabricated doctrine and lying pretence. The Order is repre-
sented as divided into various groups or classes: Mathematicians, Magi,
Kabalists, Physicians, Alchemists, Necromancers, and so forth. When men
of learning enter the ranks it is affirmed that they are required to set aside
their knowledge and become Paracelsists. Lebenswald believes that he was
visited on one occasion by two who belonged to the “sect.” Their discourse
turned on the Philosophical Stone, the Universal Tincture, etc. Their
expression was strange, their eyes gleamed, their manner was restless, they
spoke hurriedly and seemed to read his thoughts. They impressed him as

402

-- Page 436 --
German Rosicrucianism

The silence in the hidden heaven of German adeptship
was prolonged for a period of at least seventy years, or till
the year 1710, when Sigmund Richter emerged from the
sacred precincts, bearing the Sacramental Name of
Srncervus Renatus, as one who might testify from experience
concerning the Second Birth and the mysteries of a new
life. What he did, however, was to publish the Laws of the
Brotherhood, but not as they were formulated at first and
not as we find them justified and expounded in the work of
Michael Maier—the Book of a Golden Law, line upon line
unfolded. We shall find that a notable change has come
over the spirit and form of the Order and that it has passed
under a methodised rule, suggesting something behind it
which had been growing up in the silence, far from the
common ken. An alternative view would be obviously
that it was a new or recent creation developing from the
old seed.2 The salient points may be collected thus to-
gether: (1) The Brotherhood subsists under the govern-
ment of an Imperator and ex hypothest had been so doing
being possessed by some horrible kind of phantom in addition to the native
soul of humanity. Lebenswald was a champion of Latin orthodoxy, and
the views of the Rosicrucian Conrzssio on the Pope and Antichrist were
blasphemy in his eyes. He was incensed with Adam Haselmeyer for dreaming
that the Brethren might be Jesuits and recalls that he was condemned to the
galleys by the Archduke Maximilian—presumably not on account of his
opinions in this matter.

1 Tue Perrecr AND TRUE PREPARATION OF THE PHILosopHer’s Stone by
the Brotherhood of the Golden and Rosy Cross, issued for the Profit of Sons of the
Doctrine. Breslau, 1710. A tract under the same assumed name appeared at
the same place in 1711 and was entitled Tuzo-pHitosopH1a THEORETICA-
PRACTICA,

2 J must not omit to mention that Sincerus Renatus in the preface to
his Perrecr aND TRuE Preparation furnishes the surprising information
that the Masters of the Rosy Cross had taken their departure to India
“some years ago” and that none remained in Europe—himself excepted
presumably, as if one who was left to unveil the veridic method of pre-
paring Stone and Tincture and of making known the Laws. I take it that
this pretence was designed to baffle enquiry from unwelcome quarters. It
was first put forward, nearly a century before, by Neuhusius in his Pra er
Uritis ApmMonitio, as we have seen.

403

-- Page 437 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

for possibly a considerable period, during which the custom
was that he should be elected for ten years. This ordinance
is now abolished, and he is elected for life. (2) The Society
has been divided into two branches, called respectively the
Rosy and the Golden Cross, the badge or jewel being a
green cross in the first case and a red in the second. There
is nothing to indicate the reason for constituting two
branches, as it seems clear that they were under one rule
and had the same object in view, being the physical work
of alchemy. (3) The Brotherhood in both associations
combined is restricted to sixty-three members, or presum-
ably thirty-one in each branch and the Imperator at their
head. (4) The anti-papal spirit of the Fama and Conressio
has become a nightmare of the past, and it is laid down
expressly (a) that the initiation of Roman Catholics shall
be and is hereby allowed, while (4) no one is permitted to
question another respecting his form of faith. ‘This is
part of a larger ordinance, which enjoined the Brethren to
refrain from stirring up strife and discord—as “among men”
generally, so obviously in their own Temples or Houses.
(5) Members of religious, meaning monastic and kindred
societies, shall not be accepted, however, under any
pretence: it is noted that through past indiscretion in
respect of such persons two Brethren were “ lost ” in the
year 1641.1

1 With these internal arrangements, which signify at most the genesis
of a certain tolerant spirit, we may compare the affirmations of Findel on the
position of the Rosicrucian Order in the early part of the eighteenth century.
He says (1) that it differed essentially from the chief characteristics of the
preceding period ; (2) that it was dedicated to the support and advancement
of Roman Catholicism, citing Professor Woog: Journa Fir FREIMAURER,
IlIrd year, 3rd quarter, p. 147, Vienna, 1786; (3) that when the Church
endeavoured to repress liberty of thought and so forth, “the Rosicrucians
enlarged their designs to check the progress of enlightenment,” for which no
evidence is offered and none exists ; (4) that the Laws of the Order published
by Richter “bear unmistakable evidences of Jesuitical intervention,” the
answer to which may be found in the text above ; (5) that in particular the
removal of “seven tufts of hair” from the heads of Candidates means that

404

-- Page 438 --
German Rosicrucianism

The ordinances concerning the Imperator may be
grouped as follows: (1) He shall change his name, patrony-
mic and place of abode every ten years, or more often at
his discretion, in case of need, secret information of the
fact being conveyed to all members, especially by way of
communication from one to another. (z) He shall keep
the name and address of each individual Brother, so that
they can help one another in case of necessity. There shall
be a record, moreover, respecting places of birth. (3)
It is laid down that “the eldest Brother shall always be
Imperator,”’ which seems to void the election implied and
expressed in a previous clause.

It follows from the Laws passim that the Rosy and
Golden Cross is an Order of Adepts in plenary possession
of the Stone and the Great Elixir, not on the quest thereof.
This fact is exhibited by several clauses. (1) Each Brother,
after his acception, receives a sufficient portion of the Stone
to insure his life for the space of sixty years: whether the
period in question dates from his birth or initiation is an
open question. (z) The Stone may be bestowed freely by
one upon another, “ lest it might be said that this so great
gift of God could be bought with a price.” (3) The Stone
in the sixth projection shall be administered only to sick
brethren and never to strangers. (4) Every member shall
change his name and patronymic and shall alter his years
with the Stone. (5) When the Brethren desire “ to renew
themselves,” they must proceed in the first place to another
country and must remain absent from their previous
they were tonsured like priests, but this is nonsense, for priestly tonsure has
to be repeated continually by the process of shaving, while this was obvi-
ously an emblematic observance done once and for all. The only possible
conclusion to be drawn from these views is that Findel was one of many
people in the past and of a very few still remaining for whom the hand of
the Jesuits can be traced everywhere: they are perfectly sincere and it is a
matter of personal delusion which must be left to work itself out, if possible,
as it is increased rather than reduced by debate thereon.

495

-- Page 439 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

abode after the renovation has been accomplished. (6)
No Brother on his travels shall carry the Treasure of
Philosophy in “ the form of oil” but only in that of “‘ powder
of the first projection, the same being contained in a metal
box, having a metal stopper.” (7) If invited to the table
of a stranger, Brethren shall not eat “unless their host has
first tasted the food,” or if this be impracticable they shall
take in the morning “one grain of our medicine of the
sixth projection,” fortified by which they can eat without
fear. (8) The Stone shall not be administered to a woman
in labour, for ‘* she would be brought prematurely to bed.”
(9) He who has the Stone in his possession shall ask no
favour of any one. (10) He shall not manufacture pearls
or other precious gems ‘ larger than the natural size ”—
meaning presumably not abnormally large, as it is obvious
that gem differs from gem in magnitude. (11) It is for-
bidden under the penalties of the Order for any one to
divulge “the sacred and secret matter, or any manipu-
lation, coagulation or solution thereof.” (12) Lastly, and
of all things most fantastic, it is laid down that “the
Stone shall not be used at the chase.”’ J must confess that
the meaning—if any—of this instruction escapes me utterly,
though I know that Diana was a huntress and that according
to Alexander Seton, he and some others, both of high and
mean estate, had in his day of the seventeenth century
beheld Diana unveiled. For the rest, it will be seen that
these Laws concerning the Stone make mention nowhere of
the transmutation of metals.

I will take in the next place—and almost as they come in
the series—those regulations which concern the admission
of new members. (1) When a Brother dies to preserve the
secret, especially at the hands of a prince, it is laid down
that a relative shall be received in his place—his vocation
being presumed, I suppose, but the rule does not specify
this or any other condition. (2) The warrant of the Im-

406

-- Page 440 --
German Rosicructanism

perator must antecede any election, which is void otherwise.
(3) An earnest desire to attain the Art, a part taken in its
practice and full experience of all its workings are essential
qualifications before any one makes his profession to the
Order. (4) No married man shall be eligible for initiation.
(5) Each Brother is apparently permitted to choose and
appoint an heir, the procedure being regulated by several
clauses scattered promiscuously through the text. (6) A
father is prohibited to elect his son or brother unless he
shall have proved him well. (7) It is better to choose
strangers, lest the Art should become hereditary. (8) The
choice should fall on those who are “ unencumbered by
many friends.” (9) Howsoever selected, the heir shall make
his confession ‘‘ in one of the Houses built at our expense ”
and shall serve as an apprentice for two years, actually
or approximately. (10) During this period he shall be made
known to the Congregation, the Imperator being informed
of his name, origin, profession and country, so that two
or three members can be despatched at the proper time—
carrying the Seal of Office—to make the apprentice a
Brother. (11) As it is permissible for Brethren to employ
servants in their work when they are unable to operate with
a Brother, so they may select those whom they have chosen
for their heirs, provided that they are at least ten years
old, the same to make profession as usual. (12) It is only
by the warrant of the Imperator that any one can be
constituted an heir. (13) The apprentice shall be obedient
to his master, even unto death.

The following procedure is to be adopted at the initiation
or making of members: (1) Reception into the Order can
take place only “in one of the Houses built at our expense”
and in the presence of six Brethren. (2) The postulant is
instructed for three months previously and is provided with
all things needful. (3) On the day and at the place
appointed a vesture is placed upon him; he is given the

407

-- Page 441 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
Sign of Peace, together with a Branch of Palm; he is
kissed three times, and one of the companions says to him:
“ Beloved Brother, we enjoin silence upon you.” There-
after he kneels before the Imperator, having his own
Master or Father and some second Brother on either side,
and in this position he takes (4)
THE SOLEMN PLEDGE OF THE ORDER

I, Frater Non Nosis (vel nomen aliud), do swear by the
Living and Eternal God that I will never reveal the
Mystery which has been unto me communicated (uplifting
two fingers) to any human being whomsoever; but will
preserve it in hiddenness, under the natural seal, all the
days of my life. I will keep secret likewise all things
belonging thereto, so far as they shall be made known to
me. I will discover nothing concerning the position of
our Order and the abode, name or surname of our Imper-
ator, nor will I shew the Stone to anyone. All these
things I promise to preserve eternally in holy silence, at
the peril of my life, as God and His Word shall help me.

(5) The Master or Father then cuts seven locks of hair
from the head of his pupil; they are sealed up in separate
papers, with the name and surname of the new brother
written on each, and are placed in charge of the Imperator.
This concludes the procedure and constitutes the first
trace of Ritual in the observances of the Rosy Cross. (6)
On the day following it is said that the Brethren—but
those presumably who were present at his reception—
visit the abode of the new Brother “ and eat therein, but
without saluting one another or speaking,” until they
prepare to depart, when one of them says: Frater Aurea (vel
Rose@) Crucis, Deus sit tecum, cum perpetuo silentio Deo
promisso et nostra sancte Congregationt. (7) This sombre
observance takes place three days in succession, after which
gifts are distributed to the poor, according to the intention

408

-- Page 442 --
German Rosicrucianism

and discretion of those concerned therein. (8) It is added
that after a certain period of time, not otherwise distin-
guished, “ the Brethren shall be on a more familiar footing
with the novice and shall instruct him as much as possible.”
(9) After his acception every Brother shall set to work in—
?one of —“ our large houses ” and shall recommend himself
to God, undertaking not to use his Secret Art to offend
the Divine Majesty, to corrupt or destroy the empire, or
for tyrannical and ambitious ends. (10) It is further part
of his pledge that he shall always seem to be ignorant,
maintaining that the existence of such Secret Arts is
affirmed only by impostors. So also each Brother who is
at work with a servant or any stranger whomsoever, if
questioned as to his status, shall plead that he is a novice
and uninstructed.

The following rules are laid down as regards Brethren
generally. I place them practically in the order of their
appearance : (1) The Brethren shall not eat together,
except on Sundays, unless they are working together, when
they may live in common. (2) The rule of salutation on
meeting is as follows : The first Brother shall say: Ave,
Frater, to which the second shall respond: Rosee et Aurea,
the first concluding with Crucis. Having thus exhibited
their status, they shall exclaim one to another: Bene-
dictus Dominus Deus noster Qui dedit nobis signum and suit
the action to the word by uncovering their seals. (3) No
secret writings can be printed and no extracts taken without
the permit of the Congregation, nor can any document be
signed with the name or Sacramental Name of any member.
(4) Discussions on the Secret Art can take place only in
rooms that are sealed against all intrusion. (5) No member
of the Order shall kneel before any person, unless he be
also a Brother. (6) It is said that Brethren shall not be
given to much talking and that they shall not marry, but the
regulation—which has been cited already—is stultified by

4°9

-- Page 443 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
adding that it shall be lawful to take a wife, should a Brother
very much desire it, the conditions being these: (a) that he
shall live with her according to a philosophical mind, the
significance of which is doubtful, as it certainly does not
connote the abomination of a so-called Hermetic Marriage ;
(b) that he shall esteem the honour of his children even as
his own ; (c) that his wife shall not practise overmuch with
the young Brethren but rather with the old. It seems to
follow that women might be novices at least of the Order and
perhaps full members, being the earliest indication on the
subject offered by the documents of the Rosy Cross. (7)
It is laid down that no married man shall be eligible for
initiation, which is not altogether an idle rule in view of the
previous clauses, as ex hypothesi a Brother of the Order
would choose his wife warily. (8) As it may befall that
several Brethren are tarrying in the same town, it is
recommended, yet not enjoined, that wheresoever a
Brother is staying on Whitsunday he shall proceed to the
eastern end of the town and there hang up a green Cross if
he be integrated in that branch which is denominated the
Rosy Cross, or alternatively a Red Cross if he be a Brother
of the Golden Cross. Having so done, he shall remain in
proximity till sunset, in case another should arrive and
exhibit his own symbol, when they shall exchange salutations
as usual, make or renew acquaintance and advise the
Imperator in due course. Here it should be noted that green
is the complementary of red, but no such relation exists
between red and golden. The complementary of the latter
is purple, so that the colour-symbolism of the Rosy Cross,
which became important in later days, seems doubtful at
this period. (9) In travelling from country to country a
Brother shall change his name in each, “ to avoid recogni-
tion, always giving notice of his destination to head-
quarters and of the designation that he has selected. (10)
He shall not be absent for more than ten years from his

410

-- Page 444 --
German Rosicrucianism

own land. (11) He shall not begin to work in any town till
he has been resident there for a year and has come to know
the inhabitants, taking care to avoid all dealings with
ignorant professors of chemia. (12) In his work he shall
select persons of sober years, rather than the young. (13)
He shall have no intercourse or conversation with women,
but shall choose one or two friends, “ generally not of the
Order.” (14) On deciding to leave a given place he shall
not disclose his destination to outsiders, neither shall he
sell anything which he cannot carry away, but shall direct
his landlord te divide it among the poor, failing his return
in six weeks. (15) When Brethren dine together their host
shall endeavour to instruct his guests as much as possible.
(16) They shall assemble as often as may prove practical
in the great Houses of the Order, but shall not remain
therein more than two months together. (17) During this
time it shall not be incumbent on anyone to make more than
three ‘‘ projections,” the reason being that certain operations
belong to the Masters. (18) The Brethren shall be known
among themselves by their Sacramental Titles, but among
strangers by their ordinary names. (19) Finally, a new
Brother shall receive the Sacramental Name of him who
is last deceased, and all and several shall be bound by these
Rules from the moment of their acception by the Order
and on taking the Pledge of Fidelity In Nomine Fesu
Christi Domini Nostri.

The method by which I have grouped these Laws
together for the sake of perspicuity presents them in a more
favourable aspect than they exhibit on their own part.
In the original German text they are set down in no other
order than that in which they occurred to the maker, and
the result is complete chaos. My notes shew further that
they are by no means in harmony with each other, while the
fact of their publication makes it certain—at least to my
own mind—that they belong to an Association which was

4il

-- Page 445 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
not in a literal sense that which it claimed to be. About
the last course that would be taken by a Congregation of
Adepti in possession of the Philosophical Stone would be to
publish their Rules of Membership, while there is nothing
that lends colour to the hypothesis that Sigmund Richter
had stolen the documents or betrayed his trust by printing
them. If he belonged to such a Brotherhood, in possession
of such a treasure, no purpose of his own could be served
by a renegade course: he had everything to lose thereby
and the gain was nothing. My conclusion is that he followed
an agreed policy ; but this is of course tentative and must
stand always as such, since we are never likely to know.
Out of it arises the idea that the published claims of the
Order call for drastic reduction. On the other hand, it does
not connote untinctured and complete imposture. It is not
unreasonable to suppose that secret chemistry at the begin-
ning of the eighteenth century had tonic and recuperative
medicines, the value of which was exaggerated, though in
the case under notice we have seen that sickness and death
were not overcome thereby. In like manner it is by no
means improbable that there were means of producing
colourable imitations of precious stones, which the ill-
instructed minds of the makers may have thought of as
corresponding in Art to the work of Nature and as genuine
therefore in their way, even if the experienced jeweller
could apply some fatal tests. In this connection we shall
observe the prudence which forbade manufactured gems
to exceed the average size. As regards the transmutation of
metals, though there is one reference to projections and one
injunction never to expose treasures of gold and silver to
profane eyes, the Laws are otherwise silent on this subject,
as we have seen, and the Stone appears in the main as a
human medicine. In the first projection it was a safeguard
of errant adepti, and was reserved in the sixth for the use
of sick Brethren, or as a preservative against poison.
412

-- Page 447 --
German Ro.

On the whole, I am inclin
PREPARATION, according to tl
Rosy Cross, was meant to in
or supposed progress in the or
it was put forward by Sigmt
from a genuine anxiety to incc
sons of the doctrine, philos«
in the hope of securing its |
extending knowledge. Havin
least a hypothesis which seem
Laws may not only have bee
in view, but may have been f1
thereof. The PREPARATION is

| to dream of presenting in Eng

that it were otherwise, beca
work of sincerity within it
travagance of process and th
Those who see imposture or
everywhere in such cases are
who descries great adepts an
highways and byways of the
generally, I believe that in th
of ardent seekers after Myst
in the paths of chemia, and th
in their power to reach an en
was obviously a not unlikely |
the Golden and Rosy Cross
seventeenth into the eighteent
taken some steps in chemistry
there was work in the work
? Kieswetter affirms that the wor
time ef at? “the centennial jubilee

© great impetus given t]

F
RATERNITATIS, But the PREPARAT!

Keiswette i
T states, in 1714, and it f
another four years, ™ ote

4]

SLCYTUCLANISIN

2d to think that the Book oF
1e method of the Golden and
dicate a certain stage of real
ccult arts concerned, and that
ind Richter and his associates
yrporate other secret chemists,
yphers by fire, and so forth,
own position on the basis of
g regard to the period, it is at
s entitled to toleration. ‘The
n published with this object
‘amed or modified on account
, of course, an impossible book
lish at this day. I could wish
use it would exhibit it as a
; own lines, amidst all ex-
1e flush of its hectic claims.
unrelieved delusion only and
no better than the occultist
d hidden Masters in all the
“secret sciences.” Speaking
ose days there were numbers
eries of Nature and Science
at they strove by every means
d therein. Secret association
means, and it is possible that
was brought over from the
h century ; 1 that it may have
; and that in its own opinion
| to do when its Laws were
k of Sigmund Richter was issued to
” of the Order and its work, from the
nereto by the publication of Fama

(ON appeared in 1710 and not, as
ws that the centennial was not due for

3

-- Page 448 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
published at Breslau in 1710, under the egis of Sigmund
Richter. Such work was to extend the circle of initiation
and at the same time that of the lore and practice, on the
hypothesis that the great treasure—Magnalia Dei et
Nature—would in this manner, and perhaps soon, be
committed to their hands.

Such is the speculative but not exaggerated position at
the date in question, and the other memorials are few.
We hear of the great Houses, but the chances are that they
were erected only in the hearts of those who made the Laws,
though there must have been places of meeting. They are
not otherwise in view, even in any scheme of texts. The
Hague gave forth no sign; that city of great encounters
and magnetic associations which is Nuremburg put up no
banners of the Rosy Cross, and the echo of adepti was not
heard through its streets and waterways. The period of
general suspension is not of course without mythical
rumours and more or less dubious records, among which a
brief selection may be made. (1) It is said that Michael
Sendivogius, pupil of Alexander Seton and reputed author
of A New Licut or Atcuemy, spoke of Sincerus Renatus as
one of the Brethren and also of an alleged admission by
Philalethes that he had not received the secret of the Order.
This is given on the authority of J. Michael Faustius, of
Frankfurt-on-the-Main, in his preface to Purtatetua I LLus-
TRATA, 1706. But there is something seriously at fault with
both sides of the statement, for Sendivogius died at Parma
in 1646 and could have known nothing of Richter, who was
probably unborn, and he could have known nothing of
Philalethes, whose first printed testimony belongs to the
year 1667. Moreover, the great pseudonymous alchemist
never mentioned the Rosy Cross in any of his writings.
The allusion applies probably to Thomas Vaughan,
Eugenius Philalethes, who stated in 1659 that he knew
nothing of the Rosicrucian Brethren “ as to their persons ” ;

414

-- Page 449 --
German Rosicrucianism

but Sendivogius at this date had been dead for thirteen
years. (2) We hear on the authority of M. Sédir? that
there was renewed activity in Rosicrucian Lodges about
1730 and that the Ram appeared on the jewel, recalling the
Golden Fleece of the CuHrmican Nuptiats; but no
authority is given, and I have found no evidence on my own
part. (3) The same French historian quotes Hermogenes :
SPAGYRISCHER UND PHILOSOPHISCHER BRUNLEIN, 1741, and
Arca Aperta as reciting the history of a certain Adolphus
Magnus, who was Emperor of the Rosy Cross in Cambodia
and had attained the age of 967 years. As unfortunately
neither text is available for reference, I need only add that
M. Sédir recognises in both the intervention of a tale of
faérie. (4) Duke Ernest Augustus of Saxe-Weimar
brought out some THrosopuica, Devotions in 1742, in
which work he is said to have affirmed that he had been
received into the Order and refers to “ the last great union
of Brethren.” We may be approaching here a question of
historical fact, and I regret my inability to carry it any
further, having failed to find such a statement anywhere
in the work cited. (5) There is the evidence at its value
of Nicolai that after the Society of Jesus was dissolved in
1744. by Pope Clement XIV it began to permeate the
Rosicrucian Order, but opportunity is wanting to check
this statement. (6) The fabulator magnus Kieswetter
testifies that in 1762 his great-grandfather was admitted
into the Order by one Tobias Schulze, who was Imperator
at that date and was resident in Amsterdam ; that in 1769
the ancestor in question himself became Imperator; that

1 See my Lives or AtcuemysticaL PuitosopHer, pp. 179, 180, for the
fabulous account of a visit received by Sendivogius, in his castle of Gro-
verna, on the part of a Rosicrucian deputation, bearing their warrants
and proposing his reception into the Order.

2 Husrorre pes Rose-Crorx, p. 111.

3 Zu dem hoechsten alleinigen Jsnovau Gerichtete THEosopuiscHe HERZENS
ANDACHTEN,

415

-- Page 450 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
he—Kieswetter—possessed a seal belonging to his progenitor
in the alleged official capacity, but that it was destroyed
by fire in 1874, a characteristic fatality in stories of this
kind ; that the seal was of brass about the size of a mark,
shewing a shield within a circle, a cross on the shield, a rose
of five petals at the foot of the cross, while at the top,
bottom and sides of the shield appeared the letter C,
signifying: Crux Christi Corona Christianorum.

416

-- Page 451 --
CHAPTER XV
THE RITUAL AND MASONIC PERIOD
Tuere is nothing to shew that the Order of the Rosy Cross
had entered into the Sacramental Kingdom of the Rites
during its earlier epochs. We know by Fama FRaTERNITATIS
that the master who chose a pupil sent him in one instance
to the House of the Holy Spirit, where he took a “ solemn
oath of fidelity and secrecy” and thereafter served a
novitiate, or—as it is said—*‘ performed his school”; but
there is no account of ritual procedure in any real sense of
the term. Now, in the year 1717 there was put up—a great
omen and sign—the banner of Speculative Masonry among
the tavern-haunts of London, and under circumstances
with which we are all or may be well acquainted the taverns
became Temples and London like a City of the Great King
in symbolism. How it came about is a mystery in respect of
nothing else but the unaccountable likelihood of things.
Yet a greater wonder followed when the Masonic banner
passed over the English Channel and began to be erected
there and here in France, as elsewhere on the Continent,
in the rapid succession of time. I have treated this subject
at large in an immediately preceding work, and it shall
stand as my witness when I say here and now that the Craft
of Masonry underwent a transmutation abroad which
seems to me not less strange and unaccountable than any-
thing that was hoped for by Benedictus Figulus when
Deo volante he expected shortly to reach the desired goal
1 A New Encyciopzpia oF Freemasonry, Vol. I, pp. 290-9.
2E AI7

-- Page 452 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

in Philosophy and Medicine, or Sigmund Richter pro-
pounding as Sincerus Renatus—him who is reborn-—-that
perfect and true preparation of the Philosophical Stone
which he looked to achieve in the hermitages and mystical
retreats of the Golden and Rosy Cross. Assuredly Specu-
lative Masonry—Ars Latomorum—was Ars renata sincere,
in France and the Germanic kingdoms, under Ecossais and
Elect Rites, Rites of the Strict Observance, Councils of
Emperors, Princes of the East and Grades of Perfect
Masonry.

In the volumes to which I refer there is a critical survey
of the various hypotheses by which it has been proposed to
explain the origin of Emblematic or Speculative Free-
masonry, since there began to be an approximate scholar-
ship of the subject after several generations of romance and
reverié. The conclusion which I have reached is that justifi-
able evidence for accepting any of them must be declared
wanting, though a considerable inherent probability attaches
to one at least. I believe that this conclusion, left to stand at
its value, will take rank in respect of sincerity the more readily
as I have had no personal axe to grind in the form of a
counter-hypothesis put forward on my own part with any
claim upon novelty. J have shewn that the practice of
assuming the presence of a speculative element in Masonry
prior to the year 1717 is not connoted by the fact, otherwise
beyond question, that the doors of Operative Lodges had
been opened to reputable persons of all kinds unconnected
with the building trades. Long prior to the so-called
Revival at the date just cited those Lodges had to all
intents and purposes survived their raison d@étre. ‘They
remained in considerable numbers, scattered there and here
over the whole country, Scotland and parts of Ireland
included ; but they were mostly in a languishing state,
and in the natural order of things there is sufficient reason to
believe that they would have been numbered sooner or

418

-- Page 453 --
The Ritual and Masonic Period

later among memorials of the past. That which came
forward and saved them from such extinction was the
pregnant event of 1717, when four London Lodges, neither
more nor less obscure than the rest in South Britain,
thought to improve their position by the unprecedented
act of forming themselves into a Grand Lodge and pro-
claiming their intention to restore the quarterly com-
munications. There had never been a Grand Lodge
previously, and if there is very full evidence of an Annual
Assembly as a rule in the Old Charges there is neither practice
nor statute to quote as regards the more frequent meetings.
The intention seems therefore to register that the four
Lodges were accustomed respectively to meet at those
periods but had fallen into such a state of inanition that the
procedure was not maintained. This speculative explana-
tion is rendered the more probable by the further fact that
after Grand Lodge had been established its activities
were so desultory, and the inanition so far from ended,
that several years elapsed before the co 1munications were
actually restored and maintained in continuity thence-
forward.

It was not, however, the fact of a Grand Lodge, and
much less of its Meetings held according to law, that saved
itself or Masonic Lodges at large from extinction. Nor
is an explanation to be sought in the somewhat later fact
that Freemasonry began to be a thing of public know-
ledge, coming into a certain repute and favour, when
peers of the realm accepted the position of Grand Master,
however indifferently or not they may have filled the office.
The element of redemption, of awakening, of new life is to
be sought in the Ritual element. So far as there is evidence
before us—it has to be gathered from many quarters—
ceremonial procedure prior to 1717 was a mere vestige ;
it corresponded no doubt to the trifling so-called
“Mystery” enacted at the admission of Candidates—

419

-- Page 454 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
then, since and still—in several of our City Companies.
It is certain that six years after the foundation of Grand
Lodge there was a great movement in Ritual, a very
important development. [ am not going to discuss this
thorny question, which after the debate of years may be
said practically to have been settled by common consent.
Prior to 1717 there was whatever attached to the process
of making Apprentice Masons—simple, primitive, short,
so far as it is possible to tell. It is evident also that there
were Fellows as well as Apprentices, but there is nothing
to shew that there was any ceremony by which to mark
their advancement. According to his Diary, Elias Ashmole
was made a Mason at Warrington in 1646, and sixteen years
later when he was called to a Lodge at Mason’s Hall in
London, he was in his own words “the oldest Fellow
present,” though there is nothing in his Diary or elsewhere
to indicate that he had attended any Meeting during the
intervening period. The Lodge in those days was governed
usually or frequently by a Warden or Wardens, though we
hear also of a Master, especially in Scotland. When such
an Officer was installed there was no secret procedure of
any kind: whatsoever took place was in the presence and
with the assistance—supposing such to be required—of
Apprentices and Fellows. There was above all no Master-
Grade in the sense which we now attach to the Third
Degree. The three great Masonic events in Ritual which
constitute Craft Masonry—meaning Entered Apprentice,
Fellow Craft and Master Mason—in the present elaborate
form of the First and Second and of the Third as to root and
development—must and can be only, in the present state
of our knowledge, relegated to post 1717, and most probably
are the work of the period between 1724 and 1726. I have
shewn elsewhere, and it is also of common knowledge, that
in the literary, conventional and moral sense they carry the
ineradicable marks and tincture of that period.
420

-- Page 455 --
The Ritual and Masonic Period

So far on the historical and textual side ; but that which
remains over is the question whether outside Ritual there
are traces of a speculative element in the body general
of Operative Masonry, as shewn by any documents, where-
soever dispersed over the face of the United Kingdom,
or the world at large. Was there any moralisation otherwise
on building tools? Were lessons drawn from square and
compass? Was there any allusion to a figurative meaning
of stones? The answer is yes—in a casual, scattered,
sporadic sense—if we appeal to the literature of the ages, far
and wide. They were obvious subjects for lessons in
allegory and ethics; I do not see how they could escape
from the world-wide drag-net of the symbolists, and in any
case escape they did not. But the answer is no, if we appeal
to Operative documents—to the Old Charges and to the
Constitutions, so termed. ‘There are something approaching
one hundred of these memorials now known to students
and available to research almost without exception. They
have been my subject of special study, in the hope that I
should find some clear traces of an old system of morality,
“ veiled in allegory and illustrated by symbols.” It would
have served my general purpose far better to antedate the
speculative element than observe it emerge at the dullest
of all periods. To me and those for whom I speak this
work of figuration must have appealed how far more
strongly, had the great art and mystery of Gothic architec-
ture been brought sub specie eternitatis in holy catholic
times. So also here and now my hope for long was to find
inexpugnable vestiges of the Rosy Cross long years before
the protestant theologian Andre, before that zealot who
was Studion. I could wish that one or other of the vain
dreams was true which have been shattered in my early
chapters. But in either case there is neither trace nor
vestige: the Old Charges and Constitutions are not less
silent over an art of building symbolised than is Ars

421

-- Page 456 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
Lulliana over the union of Rose and Cross or the hidden
city of Damcar.

It comes about therefore that we know certainly con-
cerning a shadow of Ritual procedure in the Rosicrucian
Laws of 1710, as published by Sigmund Richter, and that
just as much and as little can be found in operative docu-
ments in respect of Masonic procedure. There was no
reality in either case, and there was no borrowing one from
another, since neither had aught to lend. There is yet a
certain natural parallel, not alone in the fact that each
institution administered a pledge to Candidates, but that
both had something to impart which they would com-
municate only in secret to those who would keep it secretly.
The Apprentice Mason learned the mystery of his trade,
the things denied to a cowan, and the Novice of the Rosy
Cross acquired Hermetic Secrets, to be hidden from the
world at large, whatever their imputed or real value. The
correspondence is slight enough and is common to all
associations which work under a veil of secrecy. In any
case this is how Masonry stood in relation to the Rosy
Cross, until the former had earned its titles, had become
a fashion and a certain power in the world—of that kind
more especially which belongs to glamour and enchantment.
The titles were earned by the high magic of Rites and there
grew up an endless galaxy of these on the Continent of
Europe—conceived, begotten and fostered there, but
also destined to be carried over thence to the original home
in England. There came a time when the Rosy Cross put
up its own banner beside the manifold standards of
Masonry ; there came a time when in a certain sense, and
for reasons proper to itself, it passed under the Masonic
egis ; there came a time when it exacted the qualification of
Master Mason from those who passed its threshold. ‘The
truth is, as we shall see in the next chapter, it had learned
something from the great cohort of Orders which—secret,

422

-- Page 457 --
The Ritual and Masonic Period

like itself—had developed suddenly about it. This lesson
was the value of ceremonial procedure, the adornment and
pomp of Rite. After initiation of pupil by Master, after
the simple bond sealed in the presence of an assembly or
placed in the hands of a Hermetic Chief who ruled a
particular House of the Holy Spirit, there came the day of
Grades and of solemn reception and advancement, according
to an established form. We shall find that the Rosy Cross,
or at least one of its branches then most in evidence,
underwent a great transformation in Ritual. ‘There can
be very little question that it was actuated by a spirit of
imitation, that it followed the fashion of a time, but that
which it did—as we shall see also—was done with a purpose
in view.

The Rite of the Strict Observance—which originated
in Germany—had practically overrun Europe and was
out to capture all Masonry in the name of Unknown
Superiors. There were also Ecossais and Elect Grades -by
the score and hundred, making great claims on precedence.
But all these things and Speculative Masonry itself were
but younger sisters at best of the Rosy Cross. It came
about therefore that the House of the Holy Spirit, with
a time-immemorial line of alchemists, magi, kabalists behind
it, with Hermes—older than Solomon—and all Hermetic
Egypt in the dusk of grey ages, began to reflect upon its
warrants. It found quite naturally that behind the
Templar claims, the chivalrous origins, the Holy House of
Solomon, there loomed in the dawn of time, ‘“ before the
Olympiads,” the Temple of the Rosy Cross and its truly
Unknown Masters. In all this panoply of tradition it

1 It follows that if the Rosy Cross, under the gis of Robert Fludd, gave
anything to Freemasonry, the donor was recompensed and the advance
tefunded by gifts pressed down and flowing over in a great horn of plenty.
The reason is that—as indicated in the text above—Freemasonry at a later
period communicated to the Rosy Cross, out of its own dedications, a high
passion for Ritual.

423

-- Page 458 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
entered the lists to compete, according to the fashion of
the moment, for a prize more or less open to all comers,
that of being the nursing mother of Speculative Masonry.
On very different considerations indeed this claim remains
among us as one of the possibilities on a remote horizon
of scholarship.t_ So far as the records go, we shall see that
it was put forward in Ordine Aurea et Rosee@ Crucis with
the uttermost detachment and the indifference of complete
certitude, as one who might say in his heart: De minimis
nor curat lex magna et occulta. Of such is the Rosicrucian
Order in its relation to Masonry during the second half
of the eighteenth century. They stood otherwise apart.
Of whatever kind or degree, a Hermetic claim or a theosophy
arising therefrom could appeal only to Hermetic students,
and though there were many at the period, the active—or
most active—Masonic centre was in France, wherein the
Rosicrucian Rite—though some of it existed on paper—
never seems to have penetrated in any living sense—that is
to say, according to its German form. Out of this
qualification there arises, however, the next point of my
story.

When rumours concerning the Order first passed over to
France the German denomination was translated as Rose-
Croix, L’ Ordre des Rose-Croix and so forth. We have met
with these renderings already, when it was unnecessary
to dwell thereon. I recur to them of set purpose and
specify that they denote either the catholic symbol of the
Order or are the technical title of persons enrolled therein.
From the beginning of things they have never meant any-
thing else in the French language. Now, it happens that

1 Those who are concerned with the pursuit of this thorny question
further may consult, among several aspects of the debate, (1) Ossian Lang :
Report To THE Granp Lopce or THE State or New York, 1918, on the
Rosicrucian origin of Freemasonry, and (2) Transactions of the Manchester
Association for Masonic Research, Vol. I, 1911, containing a paper on the
Relations between Freemasonry and the Rosicrucians, by F. Brockbank.

424

-- Page 459 --
The Ritual and Masonic Period
in or about the year 1754 there arose in France a Masonic
Grade entitled Rosz-Crorx—that is to say, a Rosicrucian
Grade or Grade of the Rosy Cross. It is first heard of under
the obedience of a Council of Emperors of the East and
West, which either possessed from the beginning or acquired
by invention or importation a sequence of twenty-five
Grades, that of Rose-Croix being numbered eighteen in
the series—Apprentice, Companion and Master, otherwise
Craft Masonry included therein. It can be stated with
absolute certainty that only the Eighteenth Degree or
Grade had any Rosicrucian complexion,! and the question
arises how did it originate or whence was it imported
therein. I have explored in all directions and have found
no answer, except by analysis of the Ritual in that form
which I conceive to correspond most closely to an original
that no one has seen. Before having recourse to this there
is a preliminary consideration that should help to clear
the issues. For at least one hundred years prior to 1754
there is no trace whatever of the Rosy Cross in France,
nor can J remember even a sporadic allusion to the subject,
outside encyclopzdic dictionaries—like that, for example, of
Bayle. I have no pre-judgment in the matter, no speculative
cause at stake, when I say that antecedently the sudden
appearance of a Rosicrucian Grade in France seems one of
the most unlikely things that ever occurred in the course of
Masonic history. Nothing led up thereto, and nothing
followed therefrom, except variations of the Grade and
developments, for it earned great repute.? It seems to me

1 There are alchemical elements in old codices of the Twenty-third
Degree, being that of Knicur or THE Sun.

2 The most important developments follow in the text above. See also
Thory, Acta Latomorum, I, pp. 335 et seq., for a short tabulation, s.v. Rose-
Croix, the heads of which are (1) Rose-Croix, being the fourth and final
“Order”? or High Grade of the French Rite. But at the present day—
unless there have been recent changes—the French Rite comprises Seven
Degrees, of which Rose-Croix is the last. (2) /oid., 1.2., Knight Sovereign

425

-- Page 460 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
therefore that the best provisional answer to the question—
however speculative and tentative—is that it came from
a Rosicrucian source. As it stands at the present day, as I
believe that it stood then, it is the Christian answer to
Masonry, the Christian intent and meaning impressed upon
the Craft Grades, their completion and their crown. When
twenty-three years later we are in a position to speak with
certainty as to the Grade content of an established Rosi-
crucian Rite in Germany, we shall find that like the French
Ross-Crorx, it was almost militantly Christian and ac-
counted, though after another manner, for the matter
in chief of the Craft. How it stood with the Rosy Cross
as regards Ritual immediately prior to the year 1777 we
do not know; but the nine Degrees of that date—which
was one of reformation—were not the growth of a moment,
as may be inferred from internal evidence. It is probable
that they grew up gradually within the secret circles. On
the other hand, it is not probable that the French Ritual
ever belonged to any German branch of the Rosy Cross : it
Prince, being Seventh Grade in the old system of the Royal York Lodge at
Berlin. (3) Knight Rose-Croix, being the Third—read Second—Degree in
the Order of Heredom and Kilwinning, meaning the Royal Order of Scotland.
(4) Brethren of the Golden Rose-Croix, an Alchemical Society of 1777
founded in Germany, for which see my next chapter: Thory’s title is
inexact. (5) Rose-Croix of the Grand Rosary, being a Grade of the Primitive
Rite—presumably that of Narbonne—and classified a second time in error by
Thory, s.v., No. 10, as Rose and Gold Grade. (6) Knight Rose-Croix of
Heredom, being 46th Grade of the Rite of Mizraim. (7) Philosophical Rose-
Croix, an alleged German Grade in the collection of Pyron and in the
archives of the Scottish Philosophical Rite. (8) Brother of the Rose-Croix,
otherwise Adept Grade, in the archives of the Mother Lodge of the Scottish
Philosophical Rite. (9) Sovereign Prince Rose-Croix, Eighteenth Degree of
the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite, also and previously of the Chapter
of Emperors of the East and West. The variants outside Thory’s list are
very numerous, but their recitation would serve no purpose. In 1787 we
hear of a Chapter of Rose-Croix, called Sovereign Chapter of Savoy, said to
have been established by the Loge Parfait Union of Chamberg. I may add
that the great Paris Lodge of Philalethes is said to have included four
Rosicrucian Chapters in its system of Degrees.

426

-- Page 461 --
The Ritual and Masonic Period
seems to me rather a reflection from that source, after it had
passed through the alembic of a Masonic mind turned to
spiritual things.

The Rosicrucian symbol-in-chief, otherwise the Rosy
Cross, is for the Eighteenth Degree of the old Rite of Per-
fection precisely that which it was for Robert Fludd,!
namely, the Cross of Calvary steeped in the mediatorial
blood of Christ, and connected also with red roses, as Fludd
himself connected it.2 On this evidence alone it is certain
that the Rose-Croix is a Rosicrucian Grade, either by
reflection and borrowing from the Germanic Order or
because the Mason who composed it belonged to one of the
branches, as there is no difficulty in supposing that he did
at the period of its origin. On either assumption, we are
entitled further to remember that the Grade is denominated
Rose-Croix of Heredom at the present day and also in the
year 1761—if not ab origine symboli—as there is indisputable
evidence to prove. But this emblematical and altogether
figurative Mountain of Rose-Cross Masonry, which never
existed on earth, connotes the Rosicrucian Mountain of
Initiation, about which we have heard otherwise and which
is equally symbolic in character. There is no object in
labouring the question of source, because nothing follows
therefrom. My sole concern is to establish that the
Rosicrucian Order, which undoubtedly owed to Masonry its
development by imitation into a Ceremonial Rite, gave
something in return, and that which it gave happens to be a
contribution to Christian Masonry at its highest—for long
and how often denominated ne plus ultra. Tam personally

convinced that the whole arrangement of the Rose-Croix

1 The recurrence to Fludd’s name in my text above enables me to
repudiate again a statement, according to which it follows from the Kentish
philosopher’s Cravis Pxitosopuia, folio 50, that the members of the Rosi-
crucian Order passed into Freemasonry. I only wish that it did.

2 The heraldic emblem of the pelican is placed beneath the Cross, but in
symbolical significance as in place is subsidiary thereunto.

427

-- Page 462 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

Grade, its clothing, its jewel, its entire mise-en-scéne, the
chambers in which it is worked are reminiscent of the older
Order. The three Points are in crude correspondence with
the Hermetic Work in Alchemy—blackness, death and
finally resurrection into the red or perfect state, it being
understood that in the Eighteenth Degree—as now known
among us—the work is of course spiritualised, as all Higher
Alchemy had done long before it.1 I could carry these
intimations much further and will do so elsewhere should
a real need arise, exhibiting parallels drawn from Rosi-
crucian and Hermetic texts on the Cubic Stone, the seven
mystical circles, the Rose of Sharon, the Lily of the Valley,
the Eagle, and outside matters of symbolism, on Resur-
rection, Ascension and the Second Advent of Christ—all
of which things belong, in one sense or another to Rose-
Croix Masonry. It follows that the various Masonic
writers who have denied any connection between the
Eighteenth Degree and the Rosicrucian Order have either
spoken with an extraordinary absence of even elementary

1 The alchemical correspondences of Rose-Croix Masonry are developed
especially in L’Eminent Orpre pes CHEvatiers DE L’ Arce Noir, a Sovereign
Chapter of which is claimed to have been established at the Orient of
Marseilles in 1761. It was a Rite of two Degrees, the first of which offers a
very curious blend of Kabalistic and Hermetic symbolism, while the second
is a codex of the Eighteenth Degree, having marked developments to connect
its emblematic period with the Death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ. Ina
Discourse attached to the First Degree, we hear of Raymund Lully,
described as a great philosopher who accomplished the heavenly marriage of
the Spouse with Six Virgins, from which union was begotten the Messias by
him expected, a perfect gold of transmutation. He presented this treasure
to the King of England, who made coins thereof, bearing a Cross on one side
and on the other a Rose. It is an old story and historically the truth is not
init; but itis useful for my purpose at the moment, which is to shew that
when the Masonic Grade of Rose-Croix was explained in the past by Masons,
they referred back, naturally and inevitably, to that for which the German
Order stood in their own minds. In the case of the Arciz Nor it stood for
the work of alchemy on its physical side. As regards the alleged treasure
presented to an English king, see my Raymunp Luuty, Illuminated Doctor,
Alchemist and Christian Mystic, 1922.

428

-- Page 463 --
The Ritual and Masonic Period
knowledge or with considerable want of sincerity. The
bond of kinship lies upon the surface of the subject, and
those who have eyes can scarcely fail to see.

I do not propose to consider at particular length the story
of the Eighteenth Degree in its developments 4 rebours and
its decadence. ‘There seems reason to believe that as
originally formulated it stood at its own value, making no
claims upon the past and presenting no traditional history.
It has passed through successive phases of corruption,
owing to the modifications which it has suffered at the
hands of the makers of Rites. There and here it has
reduced or expunged altogether the Christian elements
which constituted its titles in chief. It carries no longer
the Craft Degrees to their completion by the finding in
Christ of that Lost Word which is sought in vain by all
Master Masons. In some cases it has forgotten that there
is a Word at all. The old language-symbols have become
shibboleths in several hands or when emptied of their
proper meaning have been filled with dead expatiation.
The speaking pictorial signs have been furnished with new
signata and with the testimony which they now carry they
may be likened to bells which having rung out the true are
now ringing in the false. It is practically only under
English obediences in Great Britain and its Colonies that
the validity of the Grade is maintained, unless there may
be something in the hiddenness of Norway, Sweden
and Denmark, about which little seems known at first
hand.

There is no need to say that most vestiges, such as they
were, of the original Rosy Cross have disappeared in the
course of transformation under the zgis of false Masonries.
Yet an isolated remnant is met with at times in strange places,
at an unexpected moment. When the “ Ancient French
Rose-Croix ”? was set aside, circa 1850, in favour of a
spurious Philosophical Grade, the mystic formula

429

-- Page 464 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
I..N..R.-.I.. was rendered no longer Jesus Nazareus
Rex Fudeorum,' and one of its familiar Hermetic alternatives
was adopted, namely, Igne Natura Renovatur Integra=All
Nature is renewed by fire. A gloss, however, was added and
reads curiously enough: I=India, considered as a chief
source of knowledge; N=Nature, the safeguard and
guide of those on the quest of science; R= Regeneration,
which comes to those who know, but it is not understood
spiritually ; I=Ignorance, being that which it is the business
of seekers to combat and overcome. As regards the Lost
Word, it is explained that the sun at autumn has lost its
power and Nature is rendered mute, but the star of day
at the springtide resumes its vital force, and this is the
recovery of the Word, when Nature, with all her voices,
speaks and sings, even as the Sons of God shouted for joy
in the perfect morning of the cosmos. It is like the dead
and forgotten Boulanger testifying from the tomb of his
Deism. But after all the verbiage the Password of the
Grade is formulated with the response thereto, and these
are Deus nobiscum, Pax profunda. It is the old Rosicrucian
salutation: “Peace profound, my Brethren: Immanuel,
God is with us.”

After such ways was the Eighteenth Degree rectified, and
there seems no end to the story of its radical and casual
variations. We have seen how France scouted and libelled
the supposed Order prior to 1650, but it would seem that
in the High Grade movement of the eighteenth century
it could scarcely do enough to atone and reverse, as it
were, the judgment. The Rite of Memphis was launched
in the early part of the nineteenth century, and its ninety-
four Degrees did not fail to include a Magonnerie des
Chevaliers de Rose-Croix, which produces a Rosicrucian

1 Dr, Franz Hartmann suggested, now long ago, that the Rosicrucian
reading was In nobis regnat Iesus, for which I should like to find the authority
that he fails to give-—See Magic : Wuire anv Brack, Pp. 294-96.

430

-- Page 465 --
The Ritual and Masonic Period
history at large in the course of a Catechism.1_ The heads
of it are worth noting on the score of fantastic invention.

(1) It distinguishes several Orders of the Rosy Cross, of
which the first has been known in Europe onward from the
twelfth century, being formed of Hermetic Philosophers
who came from the East to propagate the occult sciences.
(2) Three of them established a Philosophical Atheneum in
Scotland, denominated Masons of the East. (3) Many
members of the Academy which arose in this manner joined
the Crusaders in the attempt to conquer Palestine and
hence they obtained the designation of Knights. (4) In
connection with this branch, it is added, however, that
there were Rosicrucians prior to the twelfth century, that
their origin is lost in the night of time and that they were
devoted to natural philosophy. (5) There was also the
German Order or Rite of Princes Rose-Croix founded by
Christian Rosencreutz, whose traditional history is sub-
jected to various modifications. (6) At Damascus he had
conferences with Chaldzan sages; he mastered the
occult sciences and perfected himself in the Lodges of
Egypt and Lybia. (7) On his return he instituted the
system of Princes of Rose-Croix, in three Degrees. (8)
Their doctrine turned upon the attainment of human
perfection and ascent to the Divine by virtue, the science of
hidden things and mystical theology. (g) It is stated that
this Rite had affinity with the Mysteries of Eleusis. (10)
The decorations of the Rite were a golden compass sus-
pended from a large white ribbon, and a silver ring engraven
with the letters 1..A..A..T~., signifying Ignis, Aer,
Aqua, Terra. (11) The chief symbols were the Sun, Moon

1 There is also the Antient and Primitive Rite of Mizraim, comprising
ninety Degrees, the forty-sixth of which is called Sovereign Prince Rose-Croix
of Heredom and Kilwinning. As on the one hand it has no likeness to the
Eighteenth Degree of the Scottish Rite, so on the other, amidst many
curious inventions, it reflects the Royal Order of Scotland.

431

-- Page 466 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

and Double Triangle, emblazoned with a Rose. (12) It is
said that this Rite claimed to be the depository and custodian
of Masonic dogma. (13) There is further some account
of an Alchemical Rite of Rose-Croix established at Padua
at the end of the thirteenth century for the discovery of
the Philosopher’s Stone and the Elixir of Life ; but it was
in search also of the Lost Word by means of oracles, mean-
ing “‘ magnetic science.” From which of these branches
the Memphis Magonnerie des Chevaliers de Rose-Croix
elects to descend does not appear in the reverie, which is a
blend, in about equal proportions, of antecedent fables and
inventions peculiar to the Rite.

It is necessary in the present connection to mention the
Degree of Rosy Cross appended to that of Heredom of
Kilwinning and constituting therewith the Royat Orprr
oF ScoTLanD. Itis, however, a mere shadow of procedure,
reflecting nothing from the Eighteenth Degree in any of its
codices and nothing from the non-Masonic Rosicrucian
Rites. It is mentioned therefore to set aside. As much
may be said of Chevalier de La Rose Croissante which still
lingers, I believe, in the purlieus of French High Grade
Masonry. It is a system of three Degrees.

Having mentioned on the authority of the Order of
Memphis an Alchemical Rite of Rose-Croix which is purely
mythical, it may be added that in the records of French
Hermetic Masonry, there is a Degree denominated Sus-
LIME OR Unknown Puitosopuer, otherwise Knicur Rosz-
Croix. It was dignified by the title of Order and included
three classes of members: (1) those who were dedicated
to the work of healing; (2) those who were students of
the stars ; and (3) those who were said to contemplate the
secrets of the Deity. It is certified, however, that all
indifferently followed the quest of the Philosopher’s Stone.
It is obvious that by intention at least this alleged Order
reflected the original Rosy Cross, and perhaps made claims

432

-- Page 467 --
The Ritual and Masonic Pertod
thereon, rather than on the Eighteenth Degree, to which
it bears no likeness, except in its alternative title, for
according to this it is ranged among the putative Masonic
chivalries. The procedure of the Grade is a mere nothing
and the consequences are also ml: there are few things
more negligible in all the cloud and mist of Masonic Ritual,
but it is another illustration of my root fact, that the
makers of Rose-Croix Grades never put them forward or
thought of them as anything else than Grades of the Rosy
Cross, in other words, that they were making a definite
levy upon the one source which originated the symbolic
denomination, and that the Eighteenth Degree is a palmary
case in point, for we have seen that it draws from Robert
Fludd and interprets its characteristic symbol in his very
words.

There is no question that the Eighteenth Degree, in its
valid and orthodox form as the Word discovered and com-
municated, carries on the Rosicrucian claim to possess the
Key of Masonry, to be actually its fons et origo and to deliver
its final message. It would be unreasonable to suppose
that at the beginning it did not transmit consciously and
with full intent. Its great success is to be accounted for
(1) by the fact of this claim ; (2) because that which it had
to communicate was eloquent and convincing within its
own measures; and (3) in view of the talismanic magic
which has always and everywhere encompassed the title of
Rosy Cross. It was not only annexed by the great majority
of Rites which worked a sequence of Degrees but led to
a multitude of developments, making great claims on exclu-
sive truth and authenticity. It is this which lies behind
the assertion of Barruel as to the number of Prussian
Lodges which worked Rosicrucian Grades before the German
Illuminati made a bid for recognition at their hands.4
It is the vogue of Rose-Croix Masonry which must perhaps

1 Abbé Barruel: Memoirs or Anti-Jaconintsm, English edition, II, 324.

2F 433

-- Page 468 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

be understood more especially when Von Andrée says that
about five per cent of the entire German population
belonged to the Freemasons, Rosicrucians and “ other
allied societies,” among which must be included of. course
that Reformed Order which is the subject of my next
chapter and the circle of adeptship which preceded it,
a presumable continuation of the Sincerus Renatus establish-
ment, or something derived therefrom.1 The fashion of
the time which made possible such claims as were advanced
in and on behalf of Ritual led naturally and almost in-
evitably to many of a personal kind. An example sufficient
for my purpose is that of the Austrian “ Rosicrucian and
Freemason,” named Seefels or Sehfeld, represented or
representing himself as one of “ seven true adepts ’’? who
were to appear in Europe during the course of the
eighteenth century.”

The Rosicrucian claim in respect of Masonic origins
obtained an extraordinary currency, as if envoys of the
Order were at work in Lodges,? Chapters and above all
at Conventions. Moreover, after 1777, it passed into
writing by means of a few works unfolding the Secret
Tradition in Freemasonry from this point of view. Seeing
also that the alternative fashion of hypothesis and invention
put forward a Templar origin the Rosicrucian interest
was strengthened by a fantastic marriage between the

1 Fremaurr, Heft I, p. 10, 1789.

2C. C, Schmieder: GescuicHTe DER ALCHEMIE, 1832, pp. 527-42.
Mackenzie mentions a Masonic impostor of about the same period whose
pretensions connote false Rosicrucian claims. This was Magnus Paulus
Schindler, son of a physician at Nurnberg, but he is said to have been born at
Baireuth. He represented himself as belonging to the Directory of the
Order at Cologne and posed as possessing the Philosophical Stone. He is
reported as having been unmasked by Gerhard von Swieten and having died
at Innspruck.—Royat Masonic CycLopznia, p. 652.

3 The important French Loge des Amis Réunis is said to have had a
strong element of true Rosicrucian tradition, owing to the presence of
members belonging to both Orders.

434

-- Page 469 --
The Ritual and Masonic Pertod
Hermetic Order and the Christian Chivalry. As time went
on the claim acquired a kind of traditional atmosphere and
was tolerated or adopted early in the nineteenth century
by serious writers. In addition to Biihle and Nicolai, Mr.
Wigston mentions Meiners, Gatterer, Dornden and Semler
as holding the Rosicrucian view respecting Masonic
origins, as also Fustier, Peuvret and Pyron, but on J know
not what ground as regards these industrious collectors of
Grades.1 Gould is most certainly correct on the point of
fact when he speaks of the view being held widely that
the mystical knowledge or symbolism of the Masonic
Craft was “introduced into Lodges by the Hermetical
Philosophers or Rosicrucian Adepts.”? In more recent
days it has afforded abundant material for the reveries of
uncritical minds. Yarker regarded it as certain that prior
to 1700 there were two Societies more or less related and
eventually merged together*: (1) Accepted Masonry,
which he believed even in those days to have had three
Degrees, and (2) the Hermetic Order of the Rosy Cross,
which was kept distinct from Freemasonry in the German
Fatherland until a period vaguely denominated modern
times. In his opinion the Fama legend has symbolical

1 W. F.C. Wigston: Tue Corumsus or Lireratur, p. 2035.

2.C. F. Gould: Concisz Hisrory or Freemasonry, p. 62, Compare
Clavel: Hisrorre Prrroresque pe ta Franc Magonneriz, p. 181. He
affirms that Rosicrucians introduced their “vain practices” into Free-
masonry.

3 See Yarker’s organ of the Antient and Primitive Rite, entitled THE
Knepu, No. 45, February, 1886.

4 We may compare the views of Reghellini, another and earlier fantasiast
who had less opportunities for knowledge. (1) He accepts implicitly and
affirms as matter of fact that the Rosicrucians first became known in the
fifteenth century. (2) His evidence is apparently that anno 1459 is written
at the head of the Cuemicat Nurriars. (3) He is aware, however, that
according to Nicolai, the romance was antedated and is the work of Andrez
early in the seventeenth century. (4) He says on his own part that it
exhibits the manners of the earlier period, exposing the vices of theology
(sic) and the abuse of the power of the popes, a statement which proves that
he is confusing its contents with that of Conressto Fraternitatis. (5) He

435

-- Page 470 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
points of contact with the Degree of Master Mason and
was indeed “an allegorical way of recording that the
Brethren established the Masonic Rite,” his reasons in
either case not, however, emerging. The Rite in question
was one of Seven Degrees, which of course is pure romance,
but we are saved unprofitable speculation by the fact that
they are not enumerated. As regards the Royal Arch it
was a revision of some Rosicrucian Grade, while that late
invention called Sovereign Prince Adept was extant
unaccountably in the elusive period prior to 1700 and was
Rosicrucian pure and simple. The Degree of Templar
Priest is “an embodied expression of the Rosicrucian
Robert Fludd.” ‘The Rosicrucian Order itself had appar-
ently Seven Degrees, as from 1618 onward, the evidence
being (1) the Heptagonal Vault of Christian Rosy Cross
sees traces also of doctrines ascribed to Crusaders, but does not specify on
the subject. (6) In his view the fifteenth century saw the birth of several
Rosicrucian Societies, under different denominations and distinguishable
by the sciences which they cultivated. (7) There were Mystics or Theoso-
phists, in opposition to “the dogmatic intolerance of the Roman clergy,”
and these based their doctrine on Fama Fraternitatis, though it is legend
pure and simple, not to speak of its historical position as a post-Reformation
document. The branch in question had only three Grades originally,
though these were subdivided at a later time. They were concerned with the
study of Nature and her secret virtues, and with research into supernatural
things. Their Mysteries are said to have been in striking analogy with those
of Eleusis, but the exhibited symbols were identical with those of Rose-Croix
Masonry, unfolding the universal harmony by which man is united to man,
as man is united to the universe and the universe to God. They were called
—in virtue of doctrine and science—the Brahmins of the North, though this
happens to be a post-Baconian catchword expression. These Brahmins
claimed to be the depositaries and preservers of Masonic dogma. (8) Philo-
sophical Doctors, whose system came from Gnostics and Kabalists. The ethics
of Jesus and Manes were side by side therein. They followed Paracelsus
in medicine, though he does not happen to have been born. Their teaching
was made public by Fludd, and indeed certain Germans are affirmed to have
maintained that this Rite derived from England and went back to King
Arthur. (9) Theosophical Alchemists, who were diffused widely under the
name of Rosicrucians of the East, and these worked Nine Degrees, but they
are a confused version of the Reformed Rite belonging to 1777, an account
of which will appear in my next chapter.
436

-- Page 471 --
The Ritual and Masonic Period

and (z) an alleged intimation, not otherwise specified,
in Nuptia Cuymica. The first four corresponded to the
four elements and the fifth to the ether. They began with
Theoricus [sic], proceeding thence to Junior, thus reversing
the sequence which we shall meet with under date of
1777—not to speak of the logic of things. The three
highest Degrees represented a triangle. The teaching is
said to have been communicated under a triple veil of
languages—operative, philosophical and religious. ‘The
Secret Mystery of the Order claimed transmission from the
time of the Apostles. THe Wiss Man’s Crown of John
Heydon is quoted at second hand on the law of silence
and so also is the Oath from the Breviary or PHiLosopHy
in Tueatrum Cuemicum Britannicum, but the second is
not Rosicrucian and the first is fraudulent. It may well
appear incredible that speculations like these and many
others which I have omitted are piled one upon another as
matters of pure certitude when they are not only devoid of
authority but are contradicted by all that is known. But
Yarker was a man of muddled information, with a mass of
confused inferences from reams of undigested materials,
and I suppose that the things which he evolved from note-
books and clouded memories passed in his mind for true.

I must omit his lucubrations on floor-cloths, tracing boards
and banners in Rosicrucian Lodges, as also on the aprons
worn by the Brethren. His decisions are recited in another
place and may be summarised shortly thus: (1) The High
Grades of Freemasonry derive from the Rosicrucians who
claimed in turn to draw them from Thoth or Hermes
Trismegistus, and more remotely from India.1 (2) The
word Heredom, as applied to the Rosy Cross, signifies
inheritance. (3) Certain Hermetic Philosophers came from
the East to propagate their secret doctrine under pledges.
(4) There were originally three Degrees or Classes, advance-

1 Tue Knepu, Vol. III, No. 10, October, 1883.
437

-- Page 472 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

ment from one to another being a reward of merit. (5)
The Candidate for the First Degree must have received
preparatory instructions and must have rendered service
to humanity. It inculcated an ardent desire for perfection
and sought to shield the studies of enlightened men from
the hostility of vulgar prejudice. (6) The qualifications
for the Second Degree were sincere chivalry of heart and
enthusiasm for true philosophy. (7) The Third Degree
was bestowed on those who united wisdom of spirit with
nobility of soul, constancy, morality and firmness.

After such manner was the Rosy Cross manufactured at
Withington in the last quarter of the nineteenth century
and issued with the imprimatur of the Antient and Primi-
tive Rite of Freemasonry. I have only to add that—ex hypo-
thesi—it flourished in the thirteenth century at Padua and
is otherwise of the highest antiquity. On the whole I prefer
M. Oswald Wirth, who affirms that the most striking
analogies with Masonry are presented by Philosophical
Alchemy, as this was conceived by the Rosicrucians of the
seventeenth century.}

1 See SymporismE Hermétioue, p. 86.
438

-- Page 473 --
CHAPTER XVI
THE ROSY AND GOLDEN CROSS
We have seen that according to the evidence of Sigmund
Richter there existed in Germany prior to the year 1710—
as doubtless then and thereafter—a dual Rosicrucian
Order, denominated respectively the Brotherhood of the
Rosy and Brotherhood of the Golden Cross, that they
flourished under one headship, whether or not they worked
for one end. It is to be wished that it were possible to
suggest on the basis of this division that there was a dual
understanding and pursuit of the Macnum Opus, respec-
tively on the spiritual and physical side ; but in the absence
of all evidence such a hypothesis is likely to prove intolerable.
In the simple nature of things it is more colourable to
suppose that the dedications of one branch were represented
by Exrxir Vir, the Medicine of Men, and of the other
by the Medicine of Metals; but the Laws published by
Richter offer no warrant for inference in this or any other
direction. We have seen also that according to the same
Laws there was a certain manner of acception—presumably
into the joint Order—and it was so simple in character that
it can be scarcely called ceremonial. It was comparable
—as I have said—to the method of conferring the Liveries
still prevalent in certain City Companies of London ; it
was probably not unlike the mode of making an Entered
Apprentice and communicating the Mason’s Word in
Scotland ; finally—ceteris paribus—it recalls exactly the
procedure indicated by some of the Oxtp Cuarces of
439

-- Page 474 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
English origin. But Sigmund Richter wrote and his
Rosicrucian Orders worked prior to the foundation of the
first Grand Lodge of Freemasons in 1717, and it was sub-
sequent to this date that the Speculative Art or Science
developed in the mode of Ritual and raised up that great
beacon of the Craft Degrees which has since filled the
world with its speaking light of ceremonial.

After what manner it was propagated and to what
additional Rites it gave rise I have shewn elsewhere and
recently. The continent of Europe, but above all France
and Germany, was like a garden planted everywhere with
exotic flowers of Ritual. Between 1737 and 1777 the growth
of Masonic Rites and Grades, and of Grades and Rites
which passed under the name of Masonry, however little
they belonged thereto in the facts of their purport and
symbolism, is a thing without precedent in history. The
Ancient Mysteries were numerous and widely spread, but
in comparison herewith they were few and far between.
During the sixty years which elapsed between Sigmund
Richter’s publication of the Laws of the Brotherhood
in 1710 and the next epoch in the German Rosy Cross,
which belongs to 1777, there is no evidence before us as to
the nature of the secret workings in the Holy Houses,*
but as regards that year there is the fullest material in
print and rare manuscript to shew that the Rosicrucian
Brotherhood had developed ceremonial forms and had

1 Particulars of any nature are few and far between. According to the
German Spectator, Vol. VI, No. 17, p. 198, the Society of True and
Ancient Rosicrucians became extinct in the Fatherland after the death of a
leader named Abraham von Bruna or Brun in 1748. It is not to be supposed,
however, that the Order was represented by a single group ; the existence of
several independent bodies is antecedently probable and there may be said to
be vague traces. For example, the record which I have just quoted refers—
at least on the surface—to another foundation than that of Sigmund
Richter, while the Reformation of 1777, with which I am about to deal,
Tepresents by its hypothesis a change in an organisation then in being, as it
might be, that of Richter, the denomination of which was preserved.

440

-- Page 475 --
The Rosy and Golden Cross

passed, moreover, under the Masonic zgis. I shall give in
the first place an account of the palmary Rite and its
content, proceeding thence to a brief consideration of

its historical aspects, so far as materials are available.
The Association still flourished as the Brotherhood of
the Rosy and Golden Cross, but the denomination was
generic and there is no evidence of division into two
branches. It is termed otherwise the Most Laudable
Order and the Sublime, Most Ancient, Genuine and
Honourable Society of the Golden Rosy Cross, abiding
in the Providence of God. In the documents en which
I depend there is a traditional history, otherwise a Legend
of Foundation, presented in various forms to authenticate
the Rite, and it may be summarised thus: (1) That
Adam received immediately from his Creator the Gift of
Wisdom, in virtue of which he understood universal Nature.
(2) That this is intimated by Genesis when it is said that he
gave names to all creatures. (3) That such knowledge was
transmitted by him to his children. (4) That it has de-
scended through all generations to the Brotherhood of
the Golden and Rosy Cross and will remain in their custody,
seeing that they are the chosen Sons of Wisdom. (5) That
many are called but few elected, for few only are inspired
by a valid fear of God and enlightened by the science of
Nature. (6) That the succession of Wise Masters included
Noah, Isaac, Moses, Aaron, Joshua, David, Solomon, as
well as Hiram Abiff and Hermes Trismegistus. (7) That
the Keepers of the Secret Tradition separated themselves
from the profane multitude and that a law of deepest
silence was established in Egypt and Arabia in the days of
Moses. (8) That the secret association flourished in those
of Solomon and Hermes. (9) That it continued to exist
in Syria during the Babylonian captivity. (10) That in
course of time the hidden science which it connoted was
spread over the whole globe. (11) That this diffusion led,

441

-- Page 476 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
however, to its deterioration through the wickedness of
mankind. (12) That on such account it was reformed in
the sixth century, a.p., by Seven Wise Masters and was
brought in fine to its present position and development.
(13) That the better to conceal their real purpose the
Superiors of the Order established those lower Degrees
which pass under the name of Freemasonry. (14) That
they served, moreover, as a seminary or preparation for the
higher curriculum of the Rosicrucian Order and as a kind
of symbolical prolegomenon. (15) That at the same time
Masonry has deteriorated on its own part and has passed
almost beyond recognition, being profaned and adulterated
by so many idle and useless additamenta. (16) That all
this notwithstanding it remains the preparatory school
of the Rosy Cross and from this source only can the
Order itself be recruited.

1 See Arcuives MytHouermétioues. It will be observed that the twelfth
clause of this traditional history passes over twelve hundred years in a sentence.
It happens, however, that the work entitled Der RosENKREUTZER IN SEINER
Buéssz, under the name of Magister Pianco, fills part of this great gap with
supplementary legend which belongs to the same source, and these are the
heads of its instruction: (1) That a time came when the Confederacy of
Initiates—being those otherwise described in the text above—began to feel
the need of a general unification, in which Christian teaching should be
joined to the old wisdom of the Magi; (2) that a new alliance arose in this
manner and framed its laws in accordance with the doctrine of Christ ;
(3) that under this form it suffered many changes and adopted many names ;
(4) that in 1115 it was known as the Magical Alliance of Magical Brothers
and Associates ; (5) that this was the period of the Crusades and that the
Knights Templar were formed with the help of the Alliance ; (6) that the
Templars were associated with the Magical Brothers and shared their
secrets; (7) that they stood, however, in the same rank as the last and
youngest Grade of the Secret Knowledge, under the rule of the Alliance ;
(8) that when the Templars were practically exterminated in 1311 these
Apprentices or Neophytes were ‘‘ overlooked in the cruelties of the time ”
and escaped the evil days ; (9) that they incorporated subsequently with the
remnant of surviving Templars and founded a permanent Brotherhood,
with definite rules for its maintenance ; (10) that like the Magical Alliance at
large—which recedes into the background and is said to have suffered a
decline—this institution assumed different names at different epochs ;
(11) that it was called the Order of the Cross, the Brothers of the Cross,

442

-- Page 477 --
The Rosy and Golden Cross
Those who are acquainted with the broad elements of
the Secret Tradition in Israel and what may be called its
charter of transmission will see that this Legend of Founda-
tion is varied but slightly therefrom, the Brotherhood of
the Rosy Cross being substituted for other equally mythical
keepers, such as the Sons of Doctrine in the Zonar. The
Legend is notable otherwise as formulating for the first
time, and on the authority of the Order itself, what may
be called the once familiar and even popular thesis which
represented Speculative Masonry as emerging from a
Rosicrucian centre. Assuredly those writers of the early
nineteenth century, such as Biihle and Nicolai, who put
forward this view were unacquainted with these unprinted
sources from which my account is drawn, and it is interest-
ing that they were forestalled by the Brotherhood some
twenty-five years at least. It should be added that the
Noachites, and finally Freemasons ; (12) that under the Masonic guise the
headquarters were situated at Berlin; (13) that in the capacity of a Head
Lodge it promulgated the true and fundamental system of Masonry, but the
statement is worded so vaguely that the significance of the affirmation
escapes; (14) that in addition to the three Craft Grades which were of
universal recognition there were also High Grades subsisting from time
immemorial and involving apparently many local differences of practice,
claim and privilege; (15) that the High Grade Masons included many
earnest students of the Secret Knowledge, who knew that Freemasonry was
rooted in the Ancient Mysteries ; (16) that an incorporation was formed by
these for the extension and application of knowledge derived from those
sources and from the Magical Alliance of antiquity ; (17) that it was known
as the Alliance of the Wise and then as the Golden Alliance, in succession to
the Templars and the fallen Magical Brotherhood ; (18) that it received only
the highest class of Master Masons or Masters of the Appearance of Light ;
(19) that the foundation of this Alliance belongs to the twelfth century ; (20)
that by reflection on the Jewish and Christian Scriptures in conjunction
with 72 MSS. and other writings of the Magi transmitted from the past of
ancient wisdom, they produced a new book, “adorned with the halo of
religion’ ; (21) that they assumed another title thereupon, to mark, as it
were, a new epoch or dispensation, and became in this manner Brothers of the
Golden and Rosy Cross, otherwise true Freemasons; (22) and that they
have been known under this denomination since 1510. It must not be
thought that this involved fable is the invention—so to speak—of a moment
or of a single person: it grew up out of several reveries, and, so far as
443

-- Page 478 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
qualification required for Juniores of the Rosy Cross was
that of Master Masons, who were termed Masters of the
Appearance of Light, otherwise Masters of the Dawn of
Light and of the Lost Word. At the beginning of his
experience as a Novice the Candidate received a summary
explanation of the Craft Grades in the light of Hermetic
science. ‘The Pillars J.. and B.. are significant of far
more than simple Beauty and Strength: they connote
eternity and time, the male and female principles, the two
everlasting seeds, the active and passive which rule in all
created Nature. The Sun, Moon and Stars represent
the Three Philosophical Principles, being Salt, Sulphur
and Mercury. ‘These are clear issues at their value, but
it is said also—and in a more strained, artificial manner—
that the seven steps set forth the wisdom of Solomon in
his recognition of the Trinity and the four active qualities.
They are typical also of the seven planets and seven metals.
As regards Masonic tools—the gavel, compasses, trowel,
square and so forth—they do not refer to the building of
any earthly temple but to the work of erecting furnaces
and the making of vessels which are necessary to the science
of physics. In the Third Degree the dead body of Hiram
alludes to philosophical putrefaction; the three lights
Rosicrucianism is concerned, the roots of it go back to Michael Maier and
his Sympora Aure@ Mens&. The work from which I have quoted appeared
at Amsterdam in 1781, just prior to which Count Hans Heinrich Ecker und
Eckhoffen is said to have been expelled from the Rosicrucian Order, but
under circumstances which do not seem to affect his honour in any real
sense. We shall see that in the same year he founded a new association
called the Asiatic Brethren—as it is affirmed, by way of reprisals. He is
credited also with the authorship of Tur Rosicrucian Unveruen, as part of
his alleged policy of revenge, because it is a revelatory work. It is a difficult
and very dubious question on several accounts and among them because he
has been regarded alternatively as having written a reply to Magister Pianco.
I suppose—in the absence of direct knowledge concerning it, as there is no
copy available—that this is the work which appeared at Leipsic in 1782 under
the title of A Rosicrucian Suininc In THE Licut or Trot, and I am
in the same position regarding Das Ganze ALLER GEHEIMEN ORDENSVER-

444

-- Page 479 --
The Rosy and Golden Cross

mean God, Christ and Man, the beginning, middle and
end of all things, and finally soul, spirit and body. As
regards the Substituted Word in the Third Degree, the
Novice is taught thereby that the inferior Brethren—who
walk in parabolic darkness—have lost the Word, which is
the Name applied to the true matter of the Stone, connoting
also the valid understanding thereof and how it is to be
sought and found, namely, through God and His wisdom,
according to the blessing of Jacob!—that is, in the dew of
heaven and the fat of the earth. The philosophical matter
is said further to bear record of those who are three and
one, yet not God, but the principle of the world and the
end of all things. I conceive that this is an allusion to
the three alchemical principles already mentioned, embroi-
dered on Rosicrucian vestments.

The validity of these interpretations is not a question
at issue, but the fact that they were communicated to
neophytes as of faith in the Order, combined with the
Masonic qualification and the claim that Speculative
Masonry originated within the secret circle, are obvious
warrants for affirming that whatever Grades were adminis-
tered by the Golden and Rosy Cross can be regarded only
as superposed on the Craft Degrees.? It was therefore
BINDUNGEN, Leipzig, 1805—otherwise a Furn Account oF ati Secret
Orpers, which is said to contain particulars of Magister Pianco. It is alleged
also alternatively that Tue Rostcrucran Unverep—or literally, “in all his
nakedness ’’—was the work of Friedrich Gottlieb Ephraim Weisse. Accord-
ing to Findel, this is on the authority of Hans Heinrich, who also wrote a
pamphlet denying his own connection with the work. By whomsoever
written it is notable as a record of revelation, and I have drawn from it
there and here. Among the qualifications of a Candidate for the Rosy
and Golden Cross it is said that he must be a man of honour, of true
spiritual power and considerable knowledge, because so only could he be of
service to the Sacred Alliance—a clear indication, as it seems to me, that the
Order was hoping to attain its objects by the help of its members. By the
hypothesis it was the donor, but actually it hoped to receive.

1 See GENEsIs xxvul, 28.

2 At the Masonic Convention of Paris, held in 1785, Baron de Gleichen

445

-- Page 480 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
within its own measures and subject to its distinctive
characters a High Grade movement, comparable as such
to the Rite of Perfection, the Scottish Philosophical Rite
and others by scores. Like genuine Rose-Croix Masonry,
it was also Christian and maintained the doctrine of the
Blessed Trinity, as we have indeed seen otherwise. The
Grades were nine in number, being (1) Fratres Zelatores
vel Funiores, (2) Fratres Theoretict, (3) Fratres Practici,
(4) Fratres Philosophict, (5) Adepti Minores, (6) Adepti
Majores, (7) Adepti Exempti, (8) Magistri, (9) Magi.
The authority for this sequence rests in part on the docu-
ments, to some of which I have alluded, and in part on
that work under the name of Magister Pianco, entitled THE
Rosicrucian Unverzep, published at Hamburg in 1782, the
content of which has been discussed in my previous note.

The Masonic qualification was not in itself a sole and
sufficient warrant for reception into the Rosy and Golden
Cross. ‘The petitioner having made his formal application
for admission, and this having been entertained by the
Directorate of the Order, he was supplied with a list of
questions designed to test his fitness, and put by some texts
in the following terms: (1) What in your opinion are
the ends of this Sacred Order and in virtue of what motives
do you seek admission? (z) Are you acquainted with the
aims and dedications of our laudable Brotherhood and
affirmed (1) that the Rosicrucians claim to be the Superiors and Founders of
Freemasonry ; (z) that they explain all its emblems Hermetically ; (3) that
it was brought in their hypothesis to England during the reign pf King
Arthur; (4) that Raymund Lully initiated Henry IV, King of England ;
(5) that the Grand Masters of the Order—then as now—were designated by
the titles of John I, II, III and so onward ; (6) that the jewel was a golden
compass suspended on a white ribbon, as a symbol of purity and wisdom ;
(7) that the emblems of the “ floor-cloth,” or Tracing Board in modern
parlance, included Sun, Moon and Double Triangle, with an Aleph placed
in the centre ; (8) that the Grades at this period were three in number ; and
(9) that the Master-Grade, as practised now among us, is the shadow of
something which was then of great significance.

446

-- Page 481 --
The Rosy and Golden Cross
what are those qualities by which, in your own expecta-
tion, you hope to be found worthy to share therein? (3)
Have you diligently examined your own capacity? (4)
Are you conscious of such courage and firmness as will
enable you to withstand those trials by which the Superiors
of the Order may search your heart and prove your strength
of mind? (5) Do you commit yourself with confidence to
the Venerable Superiors of the Order, putting trust in
their wisdom and love, notwithstanding that they have
the power of life and death over those who are under their
obedience? (6) Do you confess that the Holy and Worship-
ful Order is endowed with knowledge and wisdom, that
it possesses the highest secrets of Nature, including true
cognition of the image of our Principle, and that it can
communicate them to zealous disciples, according to their
abilities and desert? (7) Do you believe that the elevation
of base metals into gold and silver can be performed by
the processes of the Order? (8) Have you made any study
of the works which treat of true physics, the high science
of chemistry founded thereupon, and Natural and Divine
Magic? What books do you know—meaning obviously on
Hermetic subjects—and what are your views concerning
them? (9) Have you made any practical experiments in
chemistry, in which case what was the object in view and
what was the result attained? (10) Do you enjoy any secret
knowledge whatever, and if so in what does it consist?
(11) Are you ready and willing to attain the truth and to
learn the refinement of metals by operative practice?
(12) Are you pure in your intentions? Are you solely in
search of wisdom, knowledge and virtue, according to the
good pleasure of God and for the service of your neigh-
bour? (13) Have you, in fine, resolved, of your own free will
and apart from all compulsion, to petition for admission to
the Genuine, Most Ancient and Laudable Order of the Rosy
and Golden Cross, submitting to its Laws and Bye-Laws,
447

-- Page 482 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
pledging yourself to inviolable secrecy and unconditional
obedience, that you may become a true Son of Wisdom?

As regards the Form of Application which preceded
the communication of these test questions, it appears to
have been brief and informal, the postulant being left
to express it in his own terms. A typical example is as
follows: “I, N..N.., being a Master of the Shadow of
Light and of the Lost Word, do petition hereby and herein,
and by the Holy Number of the Order, to be received into
the most Ancient and Genuine Order of True Rosicrucians,
according to the old System.” In respect of the questions
themselves, supposing that the particular Order of the
Rosy Cross, whether of the old or another system, were
veridic Adepti, familiar with the secrets of transmutation,
it is—as we have seen in the case of the Sigmund Richter
foundation—an incredible hypothesis that they should
have been anxious to receive members and should have
devised an elaborate system for the initiation and advance-
ment of Candidates. They had nothing to gain thereby
and they ran a considerable risk in respect of the Great
Secret, which all alchemists were supposed to guard so
jealously, while it was obviously possible that their science
could be transmitted in a simpler and safer manner,
according to the old traditional method of communica-
tion from master to pupil, and could in this way be kept
alive equally in the world. I am led therefore to conclude
that as this particular branch of the Rosy Cross was at
least concerned mainly with the physical work on metals,
it was an association on the quest and not at the term of
attainment. Its position, in other words, was similar to
that of Sigmund Richter, whether or not it had made a
certain progress during the intervening sixty years.

1 Compare Thory’s Acta Laromorum, which affirms that the Brother-
hood of 1777 promised the Secret of the Great Work and the Universal
Medicine. It would be the current report of the period.

448

-- Page 483 --
The Rosy and Golden Cross

I pass now to the Rituals of the several Grades, of which
there are five codices within my own knowledge, premising
that they present the earlier stages at full length, while they
disclose nothing whatever as regards the status of Magistri
and Magi or the method of induction into these exalted
positions. Concerning postulants for the Novitiate, other-
wise the Grade of Zelator, it is laid down (1) that the special
qualifications are intelligence, sincerity, a disposition
towards peace, desire of knowledge and the virtue of
willing obedience ; (2) that each applicant must be warned
against fostering false and illusory notions; (3) that there
must be no thought of riches or greatness; (4) that the
heart must be set on the path of quickening virtue, realising
(5) that it is the duty of one and all to carry the doctrines of
the Order by their own diligence into practical experience.
On the day for reception, the Candidate was provided with
Bread and Wine in a vestibule and was required to wash his
hands. There also he was asked whether it was his sincere
wish to become a humble Apprentice of the True Wisdom
and a zealous Brother of the Rosy Cross. Having satisfied
his conductor, he was led into a second room and was
called upon to affirm (1) that he had no vain or evil purpose
in view ; (2) that he was not covetous of material wealth ;
(3) that he thirsted after wisdom, virtue and the secret
art for the better fulfilment of Christian duty. He was
then bound with cords about the hands and neck, a white
veil being also placed over his head. In this condition he
was led to the third and innermost apartment, where he was
presented as one whose spiritual being was imprisoned by an
earthly body, which however could be rendered perfect
and thus justified by the spirit. He was subjected to
further questioning and placed within a fourfold circle to
take the pledge of the Grade. The circles were respectively
coloured black, white, yellow and red, by allusion to the
successive states and stages which appear in the Philosophical]

26 449

-- Page 484 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
Work, being (1) Putrefaction ; (2) Albation ; (3) Gradation ;
(4) Rubification, or the achievement of the Highest
Arcanum of Nature. But the fourfold circle as a whole is
said also to be a symbol of eternity—compare the Masonic
Grade of Rost Crorx—and of the everlasting covenant
into which the Candidate enters with God and the Brethren.

The Pledge was taken on the New Testament and—

according to one of the codices—was couched in the
following terms: “I, Brother X, Y, Z, in the Name of the
Triune God, Omnipotent and Omnipresent, in the presence
of this Illustrious Order, and before its Worshipful Masters,
do hereby and hereon vow, promise and swear: (1) That
I will work steadfastly in the fear of God and to His honour ;
(2) That I will never cause distress to my neighbour of my
own will and intent; (3) That I will maintain inviolable
secrecy in all that concerns the Brotherhood; (4) That
I will always pay due obedience to my Superiors ; (5) That
I will act with perfect faith in respect of the Order; (6)
That I will reserve no secret from the Honourable Frater-
nity which belongs to the business thereof ; (7) And finally,
that I will live for the Creator, His Divine Wisdom and
for the Order. So help me God Almighty and His Holy
Word.”!

1 One alternative version was as follows and was taken on the Gospel
according to St. John: I, N.N., of my own free will and accord, after due
and mature consideration, do vow hereby and hereon to worship the
Eternal Jehovah from this day forward, even to my life’s end, in spirit and
in truth ; so far as in me lies, to seek out the Wisdom of God Almighty in
Nature ; to forego the vanities of this world; to strive for the welfare of
my Brethren ; to love them ; to aid them in their necessity with my counsel
and consolation ; and finally, to maintain inviolable secrecy. As God is
everlasting. See H. G. Albrecht: Szcrer History or THE Rosicrucians,
1792, p. 103. We may compare also a Pledge which seems to have been
written and signed by the Novice with his own hand after Reception:
“4, A.B, of my own free will and accord, in sincerity and truth of heart,
do obligate and dedicate myself, soul and body, to God and to the Most
Ancient and Venerable Fraternity of the Golden and Rosy Cross, dwelling
under Divine Protection. I acknowledge my integration therein by virtue

450

-- Page 485 --
The Rosy and Golden Cross

It is obvious that this undertaking lies within the general
measures of simple piety and good faith, there being
nothing—on the surface—of an occult and much less of a
Hermetic character, except in so far as the latter is connoted
by the reference to “‘ business ” of the Order. In respect
of Ritual procedure the Golden and Rosy Cross has not
made any signal advance upon the Laws published in 1710,
for the matter of its First Grade is practically before the
reader. That which remains is concerned with the com-
munication of Official Secrets, the Symbolic Name, the
Arms bestowed on the Novice, and the payment of fees.

Reception to the Grade of Theoreticus is even more like
a shadow of procedure. The Candidate is led into the place
of convocation, where he undertakes to maintain the Pledge
of the Order and submit to all its Laws, after which he
receives the Word and Token, together with a special
Cipher, the necessity or reason of which does not appear
in the text. The Grade of Practicus was important, at
least, by its name; therein it was the duty of a Superior
to instruct the lower Brethren and to prove all their
mental powers, because the praxis of true philosophy must
rest on a sound theory. On the day and in the place of his
of reception into the First Degree of Funiores and that the same has been
ratified in the Supreme Degrees by the Secret Name and Coat of Arms
conferred upon me. I submit myself cheerfully and with my whole heart
to the ordinances and commands of my Superiors. J undertake to maintain
the Seven Points of Obligation, as imposed already upon me, to the best of my
ability ; and to act as a true Son of Wisdom, deferring to my Director with
all patience and obedience. I will keep inviolable the Laws and Regulations
of the High Illustrious Brotherhood. I will love and be true thereto. I will
preserve everything concerning it in profound and eternal secrecy, in
accordance with the third sworn Point of Obligation. So help me God and
His Holy Word.—See Osrenr. Fretmaurer Zeitunc. It is probable that this
post-initiation Pledge was dictated to the Novice, thus accounting for its
correspondences and variations in several cases. It is on record that one new
member was required to keep silence about certain aberrations and differences,
referring presumably to those events which I have cited already as having
caused a revolution in the Order circa 1777.

451

-- Page 486 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
reception the Candidate certifies (1) that in his experience
of the Order he has found nothing in opposition to the
commands of God, the love of others or the welfare of the
State ; (2) that he will abide by the customs of the Fellow-
ship ; (3) that he desires to be numbered among the Practici ;
(4) that this is of his own free will and (5) that he covenants
once more to maintain inviolably the Seven Points Major of
his original Pledge. These undertakings are sealed by the
threefold Grip of the Grade and the corresponding Secret
Words. When the Grade of Philosophus is worked in
ample form there is an elaborate arrangement of apartments
and furniture therein, but the essential procedure in
most versions lies within a moderate compass. "The
Candidate is caused to partake of Bread and Wine, and is
reminded that the medial or vegetable kingdom of Nature
produces nothing more exalted than are these gifts of
Heaven, by which also God made and confirmed an Eternal
Covenant with the race of man. He is then directed to
wash in pure water and to remember in so doing that the
Portals leading to the Higher Wisdom are closed to the
impure and open only to virtuous and spiritual men. He is
asked in formal terms whether he will become a Philosophus,
is instructed in that case to pay the fee of the Grade and is
welcomed by the Philosophical Brethren, who pray that
wisdom, peace and joy in God may be with him. He
testifies that he has looked for promotion, as on the previous
occasions, that he may attain Wisdom, Art and Virtue, for
the service of God and his neighbour. He repeats the
Pledge of the Grade, which is one of obedience to the
particular Laws thereof, and is anointed with oil in con-
firmation of his covenant, made with God and with the
Order. It is prayed that the Spirit of Wisdom may
strengthen his senses, enlighten his mind and rule in all his
heart. He is given a new Word and another manner of
token, after which he offers incense to the glory of God and

452

-- Page 487 --
The Rosy and Golden Cross
His wisdom and for the welfare of all the Brethren. In fine
he is declared a Philosophical Brother in the name of the
whole Order and is embraced by all present.

The Candidate for Rosicrucian advancement passes from
the Grade of Philosophus to that of Adeptus Minor. It is
the taking of an important step and preparations in all cases
are made with solemn care. The President or Superior
of his district makes known to him the fact of his election,
or a messenger, who is himself an Adept, may be sent to him
from the general centre. On the eve of the day of advance-
ment he devotes himself to pious meditations on the
Divine Goodness, on the immortality of the soul and its
royal race. When the day itself arrives he repairs to the
place of assembly in his richest vestures. The Ceremony
in most codices, but not throughout the series, recalls that
of the Eighteenth Degree in the Scottish Rite, otherwise
Rosz-Crorx or Herepom, and in the summary account
which follows I shall omit all descriptions of interiors by
reason of this resemblance. In the part which belongs to
the Portal: (1) The Candidate certifies in the presence of
chosen Philosopht that he has been called to the rank of
Adeptus ; (2) The Brethren give him God speed and bid him
remember them, even in the Higher Wisdom. (3) The
Spokesman of Adepii enters in full regalia and with his face
veiled. (4) He wishes all present the blessed fruits alike
of eternity and time. (5) He informs the Philosophi
that they have been cited as witnesses of a great and holy
event, being the transit of one of their number from the
fourth to the fifth Grade. (6) He invites them to testify
concerning him. (7) They give expression to their approval
and bear good witness. (8) The Spokesman of Aprpri
places a gold circlet on the table, puts his right finger
therein and directs them to do likewise. (9) They swear
to keep secret all that has been performed so far and all
that remains to be done. (10) He bids them close the Hall

453

-- Page 488 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
of Assembly in the Philosophical Grade. (11) Thereafter
he says that they are about to be deprived of a beloved
Brother, but he leaves them in the certain hope that each
of them shall be called to advancement in his due turn.
(12) The Philosophi are dismissed, and here ends the First
Point. In the Second Point the Spokesman of Adeptz is
alone with the Candidate and what takes place is discourse
between them. (1) The Spokesman dwells upon the
symbolical contrasts of Darkness and Light, Death and
Life, Corruption and Resurrection or Rebirth, Time and
Eternity. (2) He speaks of the righteous man and of the
state in which all creation becomes an open book, revealing
past, present and future. (3) He affirms that the Grade
of Adeptus Minor gives increased knowledge of Nature.
(4) There is also philosophical and theosophical con-
templation, leading to the attainment of the Blessed Stone.
(5) The Stone is triune. (6) It proves the existence of God
and the Divine Transmutation of Souls in Christ by the
regenerating illumination of the Holy Spirit. (7) The
Candidate is asked whether he has sinned against the Order,
its Holy Covenant and the Seven Points of Obligation.
(8) In the event of him making acknowledgment, the free
confession is taken as a sign of goodwill and he is asked
whether he repents. (9) Supposing that he has nothing to
confess he is invited to be sorry in respect of all human
errors. (10) The required acknowledgment being made in
either case, the Spokesman of the Adepti pronounces
absolution in the name of the Order and seals the Candidate
in a particular manner on forehead, mouth and breast,
after which he is declared made pure and entitled to the
Fifth Degree. Here ends the Second Point. The Third
takes place in the presence of all the Adepti, amidst incense,
lights and the offering of praises to the Glory of God in
the Highest, all present being veiled, the Candidate only
excepted. (1) The Spokesman of Adepti testifies concerning
454

-- Page 489 --
The Rosy and Golden Cross
his charge. (2) The Master of the Temple welcomes him
as one who has been created, called and chosen for the
work of their Holy Assembly. (3) He is exhorted to manifest
the Christian man within him and to unite with them in
the praise of the Most High. (4) A curtain is drawn aside
from a Representation of the Most Holy Trinity, before
which they kneel and worship. (5) The Candidate is
pledged in respect of the Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Degrees,
which would seem to be like a trinity in unity of Ritual.
(6) He promises to esteem Divine Wisdom above all earthly
treasures, applying the riches of this world to the Glory of
God and the salvation of his soul. (7) All present unveil
and the Candidate is clothed in the vestments of an Adept,
which include an apron, after the Masonic manner, to
which a special explanation attaches. (8) He receives the
Official Jewels. (9) He is told that during the present
Decennium the High Superiors have suspended the Astral
Works because of their great difficulty and that they abide
in the Mineral Realm. (x0) So far as the wording of this
observation goes, it appears to apply only to the Grades of
Adeptship. (11) Above these there is the eighth, which
we know—on other authority than the MSS. from which I
derive—to be that of Magistri. (12) It is said concerning
this that the Eighth Degree can never be changed, for therein
is the great and unique work which is called Treasure of
Treasures, otherwise Lapis Philosophorum. (13) It is the
magnalian Jewel of Nature, and as such it can be under-
stood why the High Superiors have placed this Mysterium
Magnum at the summit of so many steps—a reference
to the staircase of Degrees. (14) The last words
addressed to the Candidate, now an Adept of the Golden
Rosy Cross, pray that he may be blessed, directed, ruled
and crowned with the fear of God, love of humanity,
long life, health and wisdom, to the Glory of the
Eternal Name, for the salvation of his own soul and to
455

-- Page 490 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
the honour of the Order, through Christ his Lord and
Saviour.

An Adeptus Minor had a right to petition for advance-
ment to the Sixth Degree, in which there is no Ritual pro-
cedure that can be said to deserve the name. It is wanting
in some codices. As a fact, he is pledged simply, receives
the Grip or Token and hears the Secret Word. ‘There is a
Cipher attached to the Grade of Adeptus Major and another
to that of Adeptus Exemptus. So far as records are concerned
this and a New Word are the sole communications received
on attaining these exalted positions. The mode of Opening
and Closing the House or Hall of Assembly is identical
in the Three Grades of Adeptship.1 Ex hypothesi at least,
the Eighth Degree is a Grade of the Mastery, and there is
no other reference thereto than that which I have cited,
either in manuscript or printed sources. The Ninth is
the Grade of Magus, which by a colourable supposition may
represent solely the status of the Headship and is therefore
a Degree in numeration, but without procedure. It would
be comparable in this case to the last and highest Grade of
the Swedish Masonic Rite, being that of Vicarius Salomonts,
held by one person only, who is the King of Sweden. It

1 According to Clavel, the Reformation of 1777 was comprised in three
Grades, the inexactitude of which statement is now evident and is character-
istic of the Histoire Prrroresque in all its sections. Probably the author
had heard a report concerning the Grades of Adeptship. He makes four
statements otherwise, which must be left to stand at their value: (1) that
the Golden and Rosy Cross spread into Sweden; (2) that it claimed to be
under the direction of Unknown Superiors, thus recalling the Rite of the
Strict Observance ; (3) that these Superiors were said to be located at
Cyprus, Naples, Florence and Russia ; and (4) that in 1784 one of the known
chiefs was at Ratisbon and was in fact that Baron de Westerode of whom we
have heard otherwise. He acted certainly as if in the capacity of an Envoy
at the Convention of Wilhelmsbad. As regards the alleged abodes of
Superiors they may be compared with those published by Magister Pianco
in Tue Rostcrucian Unveitep and reproduced in a folding plate facing
p. 218, Vol. II, of my Secrer Trapirion in Freemasonry. It should be
added that according to Pianco the Brethren of the Ninth Degree—ie.,
Magi or Wise Masters—gave instruction in Divine Things.

456

-- Page 491 --
The Rosy and Golden Cross
would appear, however, that there were several Superiors ™t
ruling the Rosicrucian Order in that particular branch or
obedience with which I am at present dealing. It will be
remembered that we hear of an Imperator as sole and
supreme head in another and earlier school.

Were any reader at this point to intervene and advance
that the “ Sublime, Most Ancient, Genuine and Honourable
Society of the Golden and Rosy Cross,” as it is called in the
extracts cited by the Fre:maurer ZeiTune, was alchemical
on the evidence of its Rituals but that its alchemy was of
a spiritual and moral kind, it must be admitted that so far
as my analysis has proceeded the presumption may seem
in this direction, notwithstanding some physical allusions,
nor is it reduced by the reference to Lapis Philoso-
phorum as the Summum Bonum reserved to the Eighth
Degree, for we may compare at need all that has been cited
on this subject from the testimony of Robert Fludd. But
as it is important above all to reach a clear issue hereon the
analysis has been arranged with this purpose in view, and
we must now proceed further. The Ritual content of the
Order is before us, with its references—few and far between
—to the Three Alchemical Principles, the matter of the
Stone and the stages through which it passes in the process
of the Great Work. There are, however, certain documents
connected with the earlier Grades, and there are certain
things which were communicated to Adepti outside
Rituals: the intimations concerning these and their
analysis may perhaps afford us light. (1) The Zelatores
received an instruction concerning the four elements and
the familiar symbols by which they are represented in old
physics. The origin of these characters is referred
traditionally to Solomon in the lectures attached to the
First Degree. According to that wise king and the Kabalists,
the primal manifestation of God originated in a first
movement of the Eternal Being. This movement is

457

-- Page 492 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
represented by \, and the Divine Name belonging thereto
is ADONAI, held to signify Creator and Omnipotent.
The next event was the fall of the rebellious angels, repre-
sented by >. The Divine Name ELOHIM is connected
therewith, and is said to mean Judge and Just. The third
epoch was the creation of Adam and the promise of a
Deliverer to come, represented by A. Hereunto is
referred the Divine Name JEHOVAH. The Triangle
signifies also Beginning, Middle and End. It was adopted
afterwards as the Signum Magnum of creation and was taken
by ethnic philosophy to denote celestial and earthly fire.
The discourse goes on to affirm that fire produces smoke,
steam and air; that air A, if caught up, changes to water
v; and that water separates itself in earth Y. Air and
fire lie occult in water and earth. If this is Rosicrucian
physics in the year 1777, it must be characterised as raving
mania. The reverie is developed on the cosmic side by
affirming that the Lord God kindled a mighty fire, that a
dreadful steam went forth therefrom, and the same was
changed into water. These opposing elements—meaning fire
and water—were united by Omnipotence in a chaos XX: from
which air and earth were separated. As regards the
Hermetic side of the thesis, it is said that he who under-
stands the four elements, who can bring forth therefrom
Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, who can also recombine the three,
he it is who stands on the seventh step—a reference to the
Grade of Exempt Adept—but it is to be known that the
Mastery is reserved to a higher Degree. (2) In a General
Regulation which is attached to the First Degree, it is
affirmed that the fundamental law of the Order is to seek
the Kingdom of God and not Mammon, to strive after
wisdom and virtue rather than to abide as mere Midas
Brethren. ‘This is to be impressed upon every Candidate,
who shall be promised no more at reception than he may
attain (a) by the mercy of God, (2) by the instruction of his

458

-- Page 493 --
Hiciuendliches rig

Das te Shalkenessictit.cc

ton) der. Heil tgjattes o

ob Mad» Nesctat ON ls raion

‘Sutiaiga nivel qi fy.
Husige

HucBortjet grit undticn ar.
eit .

Lind inerion meinted inber yd}

webt Laven famen
Db igh anes [ebowe ait Eras

dear Use tte ;
Uc HRC. a a
pdf

|
{fe nih in Anal ae) wh {IRA

(tle batts i iant Ay SruorSrv. S
24

' .
Sratate itenicds. |

ait fenttent Uafertouree

t Noa 2)
btemenia

UNIVERSAL COSMOLOGY

bile.

Ww y ustesforichliche

Lit fn ye
Mette Ica

' OF THE ROSY CROSS

To face paze 458

-- Page 494 --
The Rosy and Golden Cross

Superiors, and (c) by his own industry. He shall above all
and for ever be refused the sight of any other transmutation
than that which is prepared by himself. (3) It is laid down
otherwise that the cost of experiments undertaken in any
House of Initiation shall be on a restricted and economical
scale so that the material resources of members may not
be imperilled, above all by extravagance on the part of
individuals, working with others in the circle. The
infringement of this rule is to be visited by heavy penalties,
including suspension and expulsion.

So far in respect of Zelatores. The Fratres Theoretict, as
the title of their Grade implies, were concerned with
instruction, that they might formulate a theory of the work,
but they were entrusted with no apparatus. Basil Valentine
and his TrrumpHat Cuariot, the Rosarrum Macnum and
other notable texts of Arnold de Villanova, the AurEa
Catena Homeri, and the works of the great master Raymund
Lully were commended to their studious care. The
convocation of assemblies apart from advancements took
place in this Grade, when such authors as these were read
and discussed, or there were conversations on the physical
sciences, all being intended as preparations for the work
awaiting members when they attained the status of
Practici. The sole point of theosophical doctrine which
emerges in connection with the Ars Theorica is that the
fire of Divine Love prepared the Heavenly Quintessence
and Eternal Tincture of Souls from the cosmic cross of the
four elements, and that by this Medicina Catholica the
whole human race is liberated from the yoke of hell, delivered
from death and transmuted by spiritual regeneration, so
that the soul is clothed with the splendour of everlasting
being. It will be seen that this is the doctrine of the
radiant or resurrection body of adeptship, about which we
have heard briefly in connection with Thomas Vaughan,
but it is expressed here in language which is curiously

459

-- Page 495 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
reminiscentyof Jacob Béhme in those moments when he
reflects from Hermetic writers.

A Rosicrucian instruction concerning the seven planets
and metals corresponding thereto in old physics is more
particularly developed. (1) Quicksilver is in familiar analogy
with the planet Mercury, but as it is not to be identified
with the star shining in heaven, so it is to be distinguished
most carefully from Philosophical Mercury, the true
Mercurius vivus. Common quicksilver is called the Flying
Slave, and this ignis fatuus has led sophists and unlettered
amateurs into every kind of marsh and pitfall. Its true
nature is well indicated by the character which represents
it in chemical formule.

8
The crescent denotes its lunar part, which is feminine and
volatile in nature: this is the Spiritus Mercurii. The
medial circle has no point in the centre, signifying the
immature state of mercurial Sulphur Solis: this is the
Anima Mundi of quicksilver. The cross at the base
represents the volatile body of this metallic substance.
It is the Water of Quicksilver, otherwise Aqua Permanens;
it is also the Sal Centrale and Menstruum Naturale In
a word, quicksilver is an immature metal, an extremely
volatile ens, separated from a fixed state as pole from pole.
As regards Mercurius Philosophicus, it is not described in
the text, but the fact emerging from a cloud of Hermetic
verbiage is that the so-called work of the wise is really a
work in quicksilver, which must be separated from its
Humidum Superfluum and must be animated by its
Homogenium. It is said further that whosoever can
prepare its medium, so that it becomes Mercurius
Duplicatus and Mercurius Animatus shall be able to
combine therewith that which is Res Per fectissima and
will so produce Lapis Mineralis, the end of all research,
1 Compare Dee’s Monas HirrociyPuica passim.
460

-- Page 496 --
The Rosy and Golden Cross

otherwise Aurum plusquam perfectum. he chemical sign
of Mercurius Currens stands also for Mercurius Astralts,
meaning on the surface the planet Mercury, but there
is an intimation behind this, th8 key to which must be
sought in the astral workings followed by the Brothers
of the Golden and Rosy Cross in the decennium or period
which preceded 1777. Finally, there are Mercurius
Animalis and Mercurius Vegetabilis, because there is its
own Mercury in every genus and species. ‘There is, more-
over, an attainable adeptship in the three Kingdoms of
Nature, and those who wear its triple crown can produce
in all Mercurius Duplicatus, Mercurius Triplicatus and
Mercurius Philosophicus. This is physical alchemy in
excelsis, and it must be acknowledged that the Fraztres
Theoretici received a rare instruction, whether or not
they proved able, at a later stage, to proceed thereby to the
practice. It is missing in several versions.

(2) Mars is in correspondence with iron and the chemical
sign of this metal shewing an arrow emerging sideways
g
from a circle, signifies that the Sal Martis is celestial rather
than terrestrial, while its cross—or sign of corrosion—has
been broken up into an open angle, and this is a symbol of
fire. On such basis it is affirmed that the inward nature
of iron is fiery, active and magnetically attractive, all which
appears to indicate that Hermetic operations can be per-
formed thereon with at least comparative facility. Now,
in the work of wisdom the task before the Adept is to
purify the externally adherent Celestial Salt from the
Terrestrial Sulphur and locate it within the circle. There
will appear a great star which is said in the confused
imagery to devour all its brethren, transforming their
shapes into its own, then raising them—as it were—from
death and crowning them with highest honour. For the
Mars of the philosophers has earned such rank on its own
461

-- Page 497 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
part by the spiritual power resident in its sword of fire.
This process is like a chaos magnum informatum, but an
undertaking is given that it will be demonstrated manipu-
lando modo in the Grade of Practicus.

(3) The character of Venus, to which copper corresponds,
is explained in la grande maniére and is shewn to exhibit
the supreme operation which must be performed thereon
in alchemy. The sign indicates that copper is an imperfect
metal, for the point of perfection within the circle from
which gold cannot err has been removed from the circle
of Venus and has changed into the cross which appears
in the lower part of the symbol. ‘This cross signifies the

$
corrosive salts which render copper of a perishable nature.
Whosoever can purify these salts will reduce the cross to
a point and if he can place that point again within the
circle, he will see the sun at its meridian, instead of the
Morning Star, and possess a treasure of gold instead of
Venusian copper. One text speaks of Divine attainments.

(4) The chemical sign of Jupiter bears witness to the
great immaturity of the metal tin, which is in correspond-
ence with this planet. The crescent or half circle indicates

2
that it is essentially of lunar nature, while the cross attached
thereto, which is the invariable sign of the sal centrale
et fundamentum subjecti, points out that the earth of this
metal is mercurial and lunar, the salt arsenical and the
sulphur volatile. It follows that the corpus totum can be
brought with considerable facility to a state of liquefaction.

(5) Lead is in correspondence with the planet Saturn
and is described in the text as an odd and morose fellow,
whose disposition is exhibited by his symbol. We learn
in this manner that the salt of lead is mercurial and lunar,

h
as also pure and celestial, while the sulphur is terrestrial and
462

-- Page 498 --
The Rosy and Golden Cross

solar. It is said further (a2) that the pars salis liquifies all
bodies, but can neither fix nor render them volatile ;
(b) that the pars sulphuris devours all metals—gold and
silver excepted—penetrating them by the help of Vulcan-
like lightning, purifying and imparting the highest splendour,
but again leaving them; (c) that Mercury is coagulated
by the fumus Saturni, while vitrum Saturni renders it
fixed and fire-proof. The corpus Saturni is actually a
conglomerated and exsiccated Mercury and can be easily
changed back thereto. The Hermetic Secret of Saturn
is formulated in the following terms: (a) Salt, Sulphur
and Mercury; (b) Separate these Three Principles in
Subjectum Saturnt ; (c) Make out of the Salt a menstruum ;
(2) Dissolve the Mercury therein ; (¢) Fix it by the prin-
cipium of Sulphur. Whosoever can perform this operation
conjoins the two crescents or half-circles in the character
of Saturn, inserts the cross therein, concentrates the
cross into a point within the circle and transmutes h
into O—i.e., lead into gold.

(6) The point within a circle denotes the state of perfec-
tion. In the character of the Moon and silver the circle
is broken, and as the text says confusedly the missing half
is put inward but the point is still in the vicinity. The

D
explanation is that silver is like unto gold, as woman is like
unto man; but gold as the male part is hot and dry, while
silver, the female part, is moist and cold. The imperfection
of silver is indicated by the ease with which it blackens,
but gold is free from this failing. It is, moreover, the
Child of the Sun, while silver is the Daughter of the Moon,
the light of whichis borrowed from the solar orb. The
Hermetic Arcanum is this: Communicate the male
Sperma Solis to the female matrix of the Moon, or in other
words turn the light inward and draw out the inward
half-circle. The artist who so does kindles an independent

463

-- Page 499 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
fire or light and transmutes -D into ©—1.e., silver in
gold. ‘The true meaning of this emerges in one case.

(7) Gold is Principium Solis and the end of all metalss
gold, the great intent of Nature in the work of mint.
©
The character of the Sun and gold is also that of eternit.
As the visible Sun in the heavens is the most splendid f
all the luminaries, so is gold—otherwise the terrestrial sn
—most noble among all metals. The point within tt
circle of eternity denotes Divinity; but when this cire
is used to signify the precious metal the connotations
imperishable and pure being. The Son of the Sun is th

product also of profoundly concentrated fire.

The Rosicrucians were neither the first nor last amor
philosophers by fire to dismember the planetary signs ¢
analyse them as they stand and discover mysteries of alchem
therein, but the work has never been performed so we
and attractively as in this text. After such manner tk.
Fratres Theoretict were prepared for the Grade of Practicu:
but they were expected moreover to be well acquainte
with the three kingdoms of Nature and the harmony whic:
subsists between them. ‘This is a clear issue, but when it ;
added that they must also have knowledge of manipulations
stones, vessels and so forth, we are reminded of the fac:
that, as recorded already, they were entrusted with nr
apparatus. Presumably they fared as they could, and wher
they became Fratres Practici they had the use of a Labora
torium in the particular House of the Order to which they
were attached, making up a common purse for the costs o!
experiments, under the guidance of their Superior. They
were instructed also in the following official processes:
(1) Preparation of the Mineral Radical Menstruum ;
(2) Preparation of the Vegetable Radical Menstruum ; (3)
Preparation of the Animal Radical Menstruum; and (4)
The preparation of an Universal Menstruum. BY the

464

-- Page 500 --
The Rosy and Golden Cross

hypothesis, each of these Menstrua contains its three
principles, from which the Stone could be prepared,
according to the nature of the kingdom. It was Lapis
Mineralis, Lapis Vegetabilis, or Lapis Animalis, as the case
might be. There was in fine Lapis Universalis ; but as
to their properties, uses and effects there is no indication
whatever, except in respect of the first, which belongs to
the transmutation of metals.

There were general and special instructions on the
Hermetic Operations which took place in the Grade of
Practicus, but I have met with mere vestiges, whether in
printed or private sources. In the Fifth Degree, which is
that of Adeptus Minor, the Candidate, at the end of his
reception, is handed a process drawn up by the Most Wor-
shipful Superiors at the last reformation of the Order.
It is certified as true and concordant according to the
agreed scheme of procedure adopted at that time. It
enables those who possess it to discriminate respecting
previous operations and to prepare under favourable
circumstances for those which are designed to follow. There
is no indication whatever concerning its character. In
the Grade of Adeptus Major there is another process pre-
sented, and it is affirmed concerning it (1) that it is a secret
which has never been obtained and much less examined
or worked, except by a few exalted Brethren of the Order ;
(2) that it is an approved masterpiece discovered to Adepti
Majores on account of utility and exactitude. It must be
applied and dedicated to the glory of God, for the welfare
of others and one’s own benefit. It does not appear that
Adepti Exempti received anything but the peculiar cipher
attached to that Grade, and the general instructions on
Procedure in the alchemical experiments pursued therein.
It may be presumed that from the lowest to the highest
stage of his advancement a Rosicrucian Brother was taught
throughout in symbols and that it depended on his own

2H 465

-- Page 501 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
perseverance, skill and ability whether he decoded thx
formule. If he did a title Was earned to the Eightl
Grade, or that of Mastery: alternatively he remainec
where he was.+ ;

When the message of these instructions is compared with
that of the Rituals it emerges with considerable clearness
that the concern of the Golden and Rosy Cross in the year
1777, notwithstanding the spiritual and religious atmosphere
by which it was encompassed, had no other purpose than
the physical medicine of men and metals. The archives
of the Order fall after this manner into their proper place
as a part integral of alchemical literature. To the alchemist
in his laboratory, among alembics and Mary Baths, the
work of chemistry was in consanguinity with the work of
prayer. Laborare est orare. The quest was a divine quest ;
it called for a pure heart and a devout mind; success
therein was peculiarly a gift of God, and good intention
on the part of the operator was the first and an essential
qualification. When therefore the Superior in the Grade

1 The question of good faith is assumed in this statement, and it is of
course the point at issue. I am not affirming it, having no evidence before
me on either side. The case is supposed for a moment. Jn the contrary
event it is obvious that there would be no advancements. Hostile criticism
is likely to suggest that the whole Ritual scheme was astutely arranged to
lead its dupes onward, always left to their own devices, always failing of the
desired term, and permanently ignorant that the ruling headship occupied
no better position. I have indicated already my own view that it may have
been a headship of ardent alchemists with generations of processes behind
them, on the threshold—in their own opinion—of the great, unrealised
secret and hoping that the activities in the lower Grades might bring the
quest to its issue in the accident or providence of things. There is no need to
add that I hold this view fluidically and that it is speculative, like its
alternatives. But I am very certain that among the errors and enthusiasms of
criticism there must be included that disposition which sees knavery or
advanced mental delusion only in the highways and byways of all occult
history. We have found that the early memorials of the Rosy Cross offer
eloquent and valuable testimony to the frauds of alchemical literature, but
their authors knew that there was another side of the subject, and I have
certified to its existence on my own part there and here in these pages.

466

-- Page 502 --
a
The Rosy and Golden Cross

of Adeptus Minor informed the Candidate that the astral
workings of the preceding decennium had been suspended in
favour of operations in the mineral realm for the advance-
ment of metallurgical knowledge, it follows that this
statement is to be taken in its literal construction, whatever
we may elect to understand by astral processes, and however
we may interpret that “highest secret of Nature,” in
virtue of which it is affirmed that the Master Grade can
suffer no change. It was always alchemical and (or) always
divine. In later days it became wholly spiritual.

This is probably my last word on the purely alchemical
subject in the course of the present volume, and as it belongs
hereto only in an incidental sense, it must be left unavoid-
ably at a loose end. It may be possible barely at some
later date and in yet another work that I can throw
some light on the comparative problems of spiritual and
physical alchemy, albeit in the natural order it might be
said that the day is far spent for the planning of great
undertakings. But He Who overwatches undertakings and
is the Warden of those which are conceived and done in
His service is the Judge in this respect and in spiritu
humilitatis 1 commend it therefore to Him. There is
but a word to add here. To the fact that there are two
alchemies in Hermetic literature I have borne witness in
many writings; but although they are sufficiently distinct
from one another, alike as to path and term, their use of
the same symbolism, in a varied sense, of necessity creates
a difficulty in respect of their memorials. It is possible
to discriminate broadly and to reach a grade of certitude
about the comparative position and intent of certain texts,
but the difficulty in other cases is either insuperable or
I have failed in my own endeavours, at least for the time
being, to take it out of the way. Those who are entitled
to speak on these branches of Hermetic literature know
that the Latin Geber belongs to physical alchemy and that

467

-- Page 503 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

the AMPHITHEATRUM of Heinrich Khunrath is concerned
with the spiritual side; but at this present time I am
acquainted with no canon of criticism which will enable
us to speak with certainty as to Zosimus the Panopolite
and the inward sense of his prolific contributions to the
texts of Byzantine alchemy. So also in the Rituals of the
Golden and Rosy Cross I confess to a sense of dissatisfaction
over one point, and it remains in my mind as if the quest
were yet unfinished. It abides in that solitary reference
to the Eighth Degree which I have cited twice already
and now recur thereto. From decennium to decennium
the lower Grades might suffer a variation of concern, and
there is nothing to assure us that the measure of change lay
only between things astral and things metallurgical. But
the Mastery of the Eighth Degree was without change or
shadow of vicissitude, and the decades had no power thereon.
To what did it belong therefore and in what medium did it
work? Was it possible that the inferior ranks might be
busy over that or this, and that they were like a series of
sifting nets which brought a few only, chosen out of many,
over a certain bridge built beyond the Grade of Adeptus
Exemptus? Was it possible that this bridge gave upon the
threshold of a Sanctuary where transmutation was wrought
in souls, no longer in re metallica, where res tingens was
Art of the Spirit of God and the Medicine administered was
drawn from no other Pierian Spring than that of Eternal
Life? There is nothing before us, not even a forlorn hope
of light from the sifting of a false witness, and we may
be never likely to know. Could it be said that there were
chances they would be all against the view, so I leave this
part of the debate concerning the Golden and Rosy Cross
in that winter of discontent which comes from something
remaining over and that something unknown.

The Grade of Adeptus Minor, according to the German
Order of the Golden and Rosy Cross may be compared

468

-- Page 504 --
The Rosy and Golden Cross
with an almost unknown French Ritual under the title of
Brothers of the Rose-Cross, otherwise the Adepts. It is
evidently part of a series, representing the same procession
of Degrees, and is in fact termed the fifth. It is possible
that it reflects the Rite prior to its reformation in 1777,
or alternatively it may be a later variant. The following
points are from sources outside the Ritual but attached
thereto by way of annotation, and it will be seen that they
are of considerable importance. (1) It is said that the
renowned Order of Princes Chevaliers de Rose-Croix is
classified in two distinct categories, corresponding to the two
classes of Rosicrucian Science itself. (z) The Great Mystery
is one, being the Stone of the Wise, which notwithstanding
it is of two kinds, or Theological and Philosophical. (3)
Theology—which calls to be understood here in the sense
of Ibeosophia—has in view the transmutation of man from
the state of sin and its corruption, according to the Law
of Nature, into the state of perfect sanctity which qualifies
for Eternal Life, according to the Law of Grace. (4) The
Stone of the Philosophers gives health to diseased bodies
—human, animal, vegetable and even mineral, thus pro-
curing temporal felicity of being. (5) But the Stone of
the Theosophists communicates eternal beatitude, to be
preferred before all things else. (6) The Elementary
Stone unfolds the greatest Mysteries of Nature. (7) The
Theological or Theosophical Stone leads into the Most
Sublime Mystery of Incarnate Divinity. (8) The majority
of Fréres Chevaliers de Rose-Croix are said to hold the
temporal aspect of the work in disdain, while admitting
its necessity, for which reason they belonged to both
branches of the Order. It is said finally (9) that the ancient
salutation was Ave, Frater, the answer to which was
Rosee@ Crucis, on the part of those who were Rose-Croix
Brethren only, but subjoining A4uree Crucis in the case of
those belonging to both classes. It will be seen that from
469

-- Page 505 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
this unexpected source we derive an intelligible explana-
tion of the separation into two classes for which we looked
in vain either in the account of Sigmund Richter or the
Reformed Rite of 1777. My inference is that we might
add substantially to our knowledge were the whole French
series available.

It cannot be said that the Ritual procedure corresponds
in any wise to the German Grade of Adeptship. The
Candidate is counselled to lay aside all preconceived
opinions, so that he may be free to receive the truth.
Having been veiled and hoodwinked, he is placed between
two Pillars on the threshold of the Sanctuary and is ad-
mitted after a battery of five knocks. The Temple is in
charge of a Grand Master, to whom he is brought in
ceremonial form and by whom he is asked (1) whether he
is resolved to sacrifice life itself rather than reveal the
least of those Mysteries, whatsoever they may be, which
are now about to be communicated ; (2) whether he will
renounce cheerfully all his worldly possessions; or alter-
natively (3) whether he will accept with gratitude that
which the Lord of Lords may permit him to retain thereof.
Having assented, he is called upon to pray (1) for liberation
from all sophistry ; (2) for the kindling fire of Divine Love;
(3) for the Gift of the Holy Spirit; (4) for knowledge of the
true Mercury of Philosophers ; (5) for separation from all
aims except the glory of God, desire of the soul’s salvation,
the splendour of holy religion and the relief of the poor.

The Obligation is taken in the Name of the Holy Trinity
and includes the following clauses: (1) To preserve in-
violate whatever may be made known in this Sublime
Degree ; (2) To keep faith with the Sovereign and observe
the laws of the realm; (3) To love all Brethren; And (4)
to let them “share in the Great Work if God permits
me to accomplish it.” It follows that the adeptship of
the Fifth Degree was nominal or symbolical in character

47°

-- Page 506 --
The Rosy and Golden Cross

and that its members were on the Great Quest but not in
the Great Attainment. The Pledge is followed by that
curious observance which has been met with in the Laws of
the Golden and Rosy Cross, according to Sincerus Renatus.
One of the officers cuts off seven locks from the hair of the
Candidate, places them in separate sealed packets and the
whole in a single packet, which is also sealed and handed to the
Grand Master, the officer affirming that they are “ seven
branches from the head of that Tree which God planted
in the Earthly Paradise.” The Grand Master answers
in taking them: “Every tree which bringeth not forth
good fruit shall be cut down and cast into the fire.”

It is now only that the hoodwink is removed, after which
the Candidate is clothed with a linen ephod and girdle
and is told that “these are symbols of that purity which
gives entrance into the Sanctuary of God, for we are not
only the elect but also priests of the Most High, even the
priestly kingdom of Levi, into which we were adopted
from the tribe of Judah.” 1 It should be explained here
that the Grand Master is himself clothed somewhat after
the manner of a priest of the Old Law,? his Assistants
representing Abiathar, son of Abimelech, “ for the things
which are of God,” and Joab for those of the King.
The salutation offered to the new Adept Brother is:
“God be with thee, on the faith of perpetual silence,
according to the promise of God, in the bonds of our
Holy Society.” A discourse on the nature of man follows
and insists on the necessity of his transformation into a
New Adam, the old body being destroyed. So only,

1 As if from the Kingdom of those who are chosen in this world to the
spiritual Kingdom of an everlasting priesthood.
ba 2 That is to say, with an ephod of white linen, but the Grand Master wore
also an imperial crown, as one who is king and priest.

3 See, however, 1 Krnas ii, 26, 28.

4 It is difficult to see why the Wispom or Sotomon is quoted in this
connection as follows: Occultum faceat manifestum, et manifestum occultum.

471

-- Page 507 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

it is said cryptically, shall God give him the power to
contain all things. The text presents what is done in a
shortened form, and it is difficult to codify the next event
of the Ritual, being a solemn Prayer on the part of the
Grand Master. The heads of its thesis are seemingly (1)
that Man is the Temple of God ;! (2) that three worlds
are within him, as they are also in God;? (3) that man
moreover contains the true Matter from which the Stone
is formed. It will be observed that this is important for
the spiritual side of the Great Work. ‘There is a final
exhortation to the Brethren on the duties attached to the
Grade, being the tenderness and charity of the Pelican
towards all men but especially those who are within the
sacred circle, and the uttermost secrecy not only in respect
of the “ profane” but also towards Masons who are not
of Rosicrucian Grades. It is affirmed specifically that “ we
look upon Master Masons of the first three Degrees as but
little above the profane.” If they are “found worthy
to search for the Truth at its source, which is God Himself,”
they are to be led into the light, but this failing the very
name of Adepts must be concealed, the reason being that
otherwise “‘we should be in danger of our lives.” As
regards the furniture of the Temple, I need say only that
the Tracing-Board—as we should call it in Craft Masonry
——represents the Sanctuary and Sanctum Sanctorum of the
first Temple, with the things contained therein.

The Ritual concludes with a Catechism, according to
the prevailing custom of Masonic and Super-Masonic
Grades in France. Like the Lectures attached to the
Craft Degrees, most of them covered the Ritual procedure
for a second time, with occasional explanatory develop-
ments. In the case of the Freres Chevaliers there is another
manner of instruction which is not only exceedingly

1 Citing the testimony of St. Paul.
2 Presumably an allusion to the Holy Trinity.
472

-- Page 508 --
The Rosy and Golden Cross
curious, but so unlike anything amidst all the cloud of
Rituals that [ propose to append it in full.

(1) Are you of the number of the Reformed ?1—That is my
belief, because I know the Truth. (2) What is Truth?—
It is the Great Architect of the Universe. (3) What has
declared it unto you?—His works, and the work of my
hands. (4) How in His works ?—All His creatures testify
concerning Him. (5) How by the work of your hands ?—
Because I have seen the likeness of His creation.? (6) Who
taught you this work ?—Our Excellent Master. (7) What
did he teach you ?—That in Salt and Sol we have all things.
(8) What is this Sun ?—It is the Work of the Philosophers.
(9) How many Principles do you recognise ?—Three, that
is to say, Salt, Sulphur and Mercury. (10) In what are they
contained ?—In one only thing. (11) What is this one
thing ?—It is that Matter out of which all things, Man
included, areformed. (12) What is its name ?—APHAR-MIN
Avama.® (13) How can this be the First Matter ?—If it
be not, it at least contains it. (14) It is not then the First
Matter ?—It is the Second, which contains it. (15) How do
you describe it?—As a Circle encompassed by a Square.*
(16) What does the Circle symbolise ?—-Unity, from which
the Quaternary Number results. (17) What does this
enigma signify?—That from One there were made Four.
(18) What are these Four ?—They are the Four Elements.
(19) What do these become?—A Triangle, and this must
be enclosed in a Circle. (20) What does this become in

1 This appears to connote the Reformation of circa 1777, but there is no
certitude on the subject. There may have been an earlier development of
Ritual under Masonic influence, and it would have constituted an earlier
reform.

2 The progress of the Great Work in the crucible was often likened to the
work of creation, and the generation of the spiritual man isin analogy with that
of the natural man.

3 A parenthesis explains that this signifies Adamic Powder.

4 This part of the Questioning should be followed in comparison with
some important symbolism of the Holy Royal Arch.

473

-- Page 509 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

its turn?—It suffers no further change, for this is all.
(21) Have you any other Mystic Figures?—We have the
Blazing Star and the Interlaced Equilateral Triangles. (22)
What is symbolised by the Blazing Star?—That subtle
Quintessence which penetrates all things in a moment by
its moist and temperate fire, and so communicates its
virtues. (23) Whatis signified by the Interlaced Triangles ? —
Our Arxanest. (24) What is your ALKAuEsT? —It is our
Fire. (25) And what is this Fire?—It is our Water and
very powerful Dissolvent. (26) What is this Water ? —It is
our Salt. (27) What is this Salt?—It is our Sulphur.
(28) What is this Sulphur ?—It is our Mercury. (29) You
are speaking to me of incredible things.—I could tell you
more if you were older. (30) What is your age?—It is
like that of Methuselah. (31) Yet you appear to be very
young.—It is the effect of the King crowned with glory,
even of Him Who died and rose again perfect. (32) Do you
know the Root? —I know its Bath, being that of its Spouse,
and I have seen him naked therein, bathing with his Wife.
(33) Why do you speak so obscurely ?—So that only the
Sons of God may understand me. (34) Who are these ? —
They are those who do His will. (35) How long have you
been born?—From the moment that I died. (36) What
is the hour? —It is a great day which knows no darkness.
(37) Why do you answer my question indirectly ?—How
can I determine the hour of a perpetual day? (38) Where
did you find the Light ?—In Darkness. (39) When do you
work ?—When I take my rest. (40) What is your Wage ? —
The perfection of my work. (41) What ambition do you
cherish in view of all this wealth ?—The joy of supplying
the needs of men of good report. (42) Have you no
further wishes?—Only to be ignored by the world, only
to live for God, Who is the sole aim of our true Brethren.

It will be seen that this Catechism combines the
symbolical language of Alchemy with the geometrical

474

-- Page 510 --
The Rosy and Golden Cross *
emblems of Craft and Arch Masonry, but that it abandons
both in the end and passes to the terms which veil a purely
mystical research, pursued in the experience of mystical
death and the illumination which follows thereon. ‘The
work that is performed in rest is an intimation of the
activity at the centre, and it is known that the realisation
therein is the plenary reward thereof.

It remains only to say that whether the Grade of Fréres
Chevaliers derived approximately or remotely from Rosi-
crucian sources prior to 1777 or whether it represented a
variant in Ritual from that epoch of reform, it was sub-
sequent to the Rite of Perfection and to that Eighteenth
Degree which developed out of Rosicrucian elements a
Grade of princely knighthood.

In the year 1785 there began to appear at Altona a work
of extraordinary interest under the title of Szcrer SyMBOLs
OF THE RosIcRUCIANS OF THE SIXTEENTH AND SEVENTEENTH
Centoriss.! The text included Avreum Secutum Repivir
vum—otherwise THE Gozpen AcE Restorep of Henricus
Madathanus—and the Tracratus Aureus of an anonymous
German Adept. Both had been translated into Latin and
published previously in Museum Hermeticum RerormatuM
ert AMPLIFICATUM at Frankfurt so far back as 1678, and
prior to this in the original edition of the same work, which
belongs to 1625, and contains nine tracts against twenty-
two of the enlarged collection. Both also had appeared
originally in German. They were reissued under the Rosi-
crucian auspices as if made public for the first time, but
adding a reference to the Brethren of the Golden Cross in
the sub-title of The Golden Treatise and describing Mada-

1 The fore-title of Part I reads Genemme Ficuren per RosENKREUZER AUS
DEM I6rTEN UND I77EN JAHRHUNDERT. The title itself is as follows: Diz
LEHREN DE RosENKREUZER AUS DEM I6TEN UND I77=N Jauruunpert, Oder
Einfaltig A BC Buchlein fiir Junge Schiilerso sich taglich fleissig iiben in der
Schule des H. Geistes, etc. Part II, which was not issued till 1788, has no
fore-title and appears in the full title as Gznerme Ficursn, etc,

475

-- Page 511 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
thanus as Theosophus, Medicus et tandem Det Gratia Auree
Crucis Frater. Whereas also he subscribed his preface “ to
the worthy and Christian reader ” as “‘ written at Taunen-
berg, March 23, 1622, it is represented in the Secret Symbols
as datum in Monte Abiegno, die 25 Martii, anno 1621, as if
put forward by authority from the Holy House of the
Brotherhood. The original text of Madathanus had certain

‘Order references, and it is the subject of allusion in the
preface of the anonymous German. It points out rather
cryptically that he “ could more easily have composed this
treatise ” and made himself “‘ known to the Brethren of the
Golden Cross,” if he had not verified his references for the
convenience of his readers. His address concludes with an
appeal to “the Beloved Brethren of the Golden Cross,
who are about to learn how to enjoy and use this most
precious gift of God in secret ”—presumably owing to his
instruction. The appeal is: ‘‘ Do not remain unknown to
me,” adding: “If ye know me not, be sure that the
faithful will be approved and their faith become known
through the Cross, while security and pleasure over-
shadow it.” ‘These allusions are valuable as a further testi-
mony to the fact that Rosicrucians had begun so early to be
known no longer under their original title but under that
of the Golden Cross. I need add only that Tur GoLpENn
TREATISE is an interesting collated catena of alchemical
authorities, with a parable placed at the end, while Tue
Goupen Ack is an allegorical story to which is attached an
Epilogue, wherein Madathanus beseeches “ the Creator of
this Art ” that he may not “speak of this Mystery or
make it known to the wicked” lest he be found
“unmindful” of his vow, “a breaker of the Heavenly
Seal, a perjured Brother of the Golden Cross, and guilty
of the sin against the Holy Ghost.

It follows that this tract is important to our purpose
1 It described the author, moreover, as Aurce Crucis Frater.
476

-- Page 512 --
The Rosy and Golden Cross

from the standpoint of its own hypothesis, as speaking from
the seat of authority on the subject of Hermetic Doctrine
and Practice.1 It is unfortunately by the hypothesis only,
for THe Goxtpen Acs Restorep is the story of a dream
and a waking in which the matter of dream continues. It
tells of a virgin in the court and harem of Solomon who is
described in the terms of the Sonc or Cantictz oF CANTICLES
and is therefore all beautiful; but her garments—which
lie at her feet—are “‘ rancid, ill-savoured and full of venom.”
The virgin is ‘‘ Nature bared and the most secret of all
secrets that is found beneath the sky and earth.” The duty
imposed on the dreamer was to cleanse the garments with
a certain lye, the recompense of which would be the hand
of the virgin, together with “a flowing salt, an incom-
bustible oil and an inestimable treasure.’ At this point
the dreamer awakes and finds the foul garments in his
chamber. As he does not know how to proceed he changes
his room and leaves them untouched for five years, when he
is on the point of burning them but is hindered by another
dream, in which he is reproached bitterly as having caused
the virgin’s death. Having protested his innocence, he is
told of a box beneath the garments and of great treasures
therein. He discovers it in the waking state and after
further failure as the fruit of ignorance he is able to open the
casket and gaze upon “ brilliant lunar diamonds and solar
rubies.” Thereafter the dawn breaks, which is that of the
restored Golden Age; all who see it rejoice in the Lord,
while the dreamer kneels down and glorifies His Holy Name.

An Epilogue explains that this is the Great Mystery of
the Sages, “‘ the power and glory thereof and the Revelation
of the Spirit.” It is otherwise an exposition of “ the Most
Precious Philosophical Stone and the Arcanum of the Sages.”

1 According to Sédir, Madathanus gives accounts of Rosicrucian statutes
and jewels. but he has been misled by materials which he did not collect
himself.

477

-- Page 513 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
On the surface at least it is concerned with the work on
metals, and the Preface derides those who seek the Blessed
Matter among animal or vegetable substances and any-
where indeed apparently except in the House of the Seven
Metals. But it is difficult to say, for all the processes and
apparatus of Alchemy are condemned as plausible impostures
—the purgations, sublimations, putrefactions, solutions,
coagulations and so also the athanors, alembics and retorts.
Nature, it is affirmed, “ delights'in her own proper sub-
stance” and “ knows nothing of these futilities.” The
work is not therefore performed by processes comparable
to those of chemistry and would not seem to be a material
work. Yet an Epigram at the end of the Preface affirms
as follows: “I have sought; I have found; I have
purified often...I have matured it. Then has
followed that Golden Tincture which is called the Centre
of Nature. ... It is the Remedy... for all metals
and for all sick persons.” On this understanding it can be
only a physical Elixir, and Madathanus testifies: that
he has “ seen with these eyes and handled with these hands.”
We are therefore in the usual medley of words and
symbols which are all at issue with each other. I note only
as regards “the Centre of Nature ” that it was shewn to
the dreamer “in the Triangle of the Centre ” by Solomon,
when accompanied by all his queens, concubines and virgins,
while in the course of a later episode “his whole harem
was stripped naked,” expecting that in this manner some
light on the Great Mystery would come to the dreamer. If
therefore Aureum SEcULUM ‘was issued as pretended from
a House of the Rosy Cross, it would look as if that House
were at work on a mystery of sex and that owing to its
nature Madathanus may have been justified in saying that
“the laws which obtain in the Republic of the Chemists
forbade me to write more openly or plainly,” the reason
being that “ many evils would arise from a profanation of
478

-- Page 514 --
The Rosy and Golden Cross
the Arcanum ” and that it “ would be manifestly contrary
to God’s will.” He intimates further that in the enjoyment
of such “ hidden fruits of philosophy ” the “ Brethren of
the True Golden Cross and the elect Members of the
Philosophical Communion are and remain joined together
in a great Confederation.”

So far as regards the main texts of Tur Secrer Symzots,
but the work opens with an untitled section concerning
the Magistery of the Philosophical Stone, the Universal
Tincture of all metals, the cryptic language and parables
of the Art, the First Matter, the Three Principles, the
putative Elements and the several processes which succeed
one another in the course of the Great Work. Stress is laid
upon the innate Sulphur of Mercury, by which the latter
is stilled and fixed. It is said to be a secret and hidden
fire which—according to Crebrerus—digests the cold and
moisture of Mercury in the long procession of time. This
preface, if it may be so called, is followed by eleven elaborate
plates in colour, the majority of which are closely set about
with German text. The next item is an octosyllabic poem
on the Emerald Table of Hermes, after which comes THE
Goupen Ace Resrorep, succeeded by thirteen further
plates, coloured in like manner and also inscribed heavily
within and without. They complete the first part, published
at Altona in 1785. The second part followed at the same
place in 1788 and it opens with Tur Gotpen TREATISE, to
which are appended twelve final plates. The entire work
is said to have been found and translated by J. D.A.
Eckhardt, about whom I can report nothing.

As regards the scheme of colour there are certain broad
lines less or more followed, but in several cases it is difficult
to see that there is any real order at all or that the arrange-
ment—if any—is not a matter of fantasy. The four
elements, Fire, Air, Water and Earth are respectively red,
yellow, green and blue, which obtains generally, but not

479

-- Page 515 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
without exceptions, for on one occasion Water is represented
white. The Holy Trinity in Its relation to temporal things
is referred to elemental colourings, the Father to the
Red of Fire, the Son to terrestial blue, the Holy Spirit to
yellow and Air, while the circle which represents Jesus
Christ as God and Man, Alpha and Omega, is coloured
green and is thus attributed to Water. The allocations in
respect of the Son and the Son of Man are explicable only
on very fantastic lines. Among other attributions there are
some which are not explicable at all, as for example the
Cross in one of its representations to a drab cinnamon-
brown, minerals to blue and the Light of Nature to blue
also. In fine there are some and many which call for no
interpretation, being plain upon the face of their symbolism
because it draws from the nature of things. All things
which connect with the Sun and with gold, its metallic
correspondence, are coloured golden yellow : so also are the
Sun of Righteousness and other types of Christ. Salt,
Sulphur and Mercury, the three Philosophical Principles,
are Blue, Reddish and pale Yellow. So also there are
traditional grounds for connecting Saturn with Indigo,
Jupiter with Blue, Mars with Red, the Sun with Orange,
Venus with Green, Mercury with Brown and the Moon
with White. The subject and its variants could be pursued
further but it would serve no purpose here. Jam acquainted
with other Rosicrucian schemes of colour which have been
developed in a logical order, and there is one of them which
I regard as important because of certain analogies with the
modes and gifts of grace; but they are not those of the
Secret Symbols. Wowever they are allocated and whether
reflecting tradition or not, it must be said that they are
all arbitrary in the last resource, and their eloquence—
such as it is—is that of agreed signs.

I have dwelt at some length on the subject of Tur Secret
Sympots, because of that which is intimated by their
480

-- Page 516 --
The Rosy and Golden Cross
letterpress, apart from the text of the work. Whether it
was issued by the same House or Temple which adopted
the Reformation of 1777, it is impossible to say, but it may
be observed that there is no trace of Emblematic Free-
masonry. We are in the presence of a school or system
which drew in part from Paracelsus, in part from Jacob
Bohme, which did not despise the secret of Tinctura
Philosophica, but regarded this evidently as the least of its
accredited treasures. It may or may not have been ac~
quainted with the eloquent memorials of Robert Fludd,
but it was carrying on the tradition established or adopted
by him. It has the aspect of a text produced by an occult
and theosophical Church in Christendom, and it reflects
so closely the mystical House of Election pictured by
Eckhartshausen a few years later on that when we remember
his dedications in Alchemy, the higher Magia and the
mystery of numbers it seems by no means impossible either
that he was the concealed author or alternatively that it
emanated from a foundation to which he belonged and about
which he wrote otherwise subsequently. However possible,
it must be understood at the same time that there is nothing
overt in his acknowledged writings to connect him with the
Rosy Cross.1

It remains to be said that in 1888 and at Boston, U.S.A.,
Dr. Franz Hartmann produced an English edition of Tur
SecreT SYMBOLS, stating that it was “ copied and trans-
lated from an old German MS.” Dr. Hartmann added
material of his own, outside the original text, which
represents the views and speculations of modern Theo-

1 In Tue Turosoruist, Vols. 8 and 9, there appeared long ago certain
Rosicrucian Lerrers, signed F.H. and H. in the case of the last. It is
affirmed that No. 6 was addressed to Eckartshausen. They have been re-
published since in an American periodical, the initials suppressed and the
whole series described as written to Eckartshausen between 1792 and 1801,
It is claimed that they are translated from the Spanish. The initials suggest
obviously the hand of Dr. Franz Hartmann.

21 481

-- Page 518 --
CHAPTER XVII
SAINT-GERMAIN AND CAGLIOSTRO

THE romance of the Rosy Cross has formed for generations
which have almost passed into centuries a prolific fund of
suggestion in the fact that its early history obtained for the
Brethren a title as mysterious as that which they had assumed
on their own part. They were called—as we all know—
the Invisibles. It mattered little to romance that the
denomination was applied originally by way of derision, for
those who manufactured and those who marketed in that
creative world carried a hallowing wand. All the proble-
matical personalities who emerged for periods or moments
from the background of history, carrying a knapsack or
wallet of strange pretensions, were sealed by imagination
with the symbol of the Rosy Cross. The apparitions and
occultations of the Comte de Saint-Germain would have
earned him the title had he made only a small percentage
of his imputed claims. It is interesting to note how the
myth has grown concerning him, till at this day he has
received his crown and nimbus in the form of a cultus.
We shall see that there is no cultus which is so utterly its
own and no other as that of Saint-Germain. For the pur-
pose, however, of this sketch, the most notable reports
concerning him can be reduced within a small compass,
It is by reason only of his growing importance from the
cultus point of view that it is desirable to notice him at all.

I will make a beginning with unquestioned matters
of fact, contained in certain diplomatic correspondence

483

-- Page 519 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Crass
preserved in the British Museum under the title of
Mrrcuett Papers. (1) On March 14, 1760, Major-General
Joseph Yorke, English Envoy yt the Hague, wrote to the
Earl of Holdernesse, reminding him that he was acquainted
with the history of an extraordinary man, known as the
Comte de Saint-Germain, who had resided some time in
England, where, however, he had done nothing. Since
that period, and during a space of two or three years, he
had been living in France, on the most familiar footing
with the French King, Mme. de Pompadour, M. de
Belleisle and others. He had been granted an apartment
in the Castle of Chambord and had made a certain figure
in the country. More recently he had been at Amsterdam,

& “where he was much caressed and talked of,” and on the
marriage of Princess Caroline he had arrived at the Hague,
where he called on General Yorke, who returned his visit.
Subsequently he desired to speak with the English Envoy,
and the appointment was kept on the date of Yorke’s letter.
Saint-Germain produced two communications from
Marshal Belleisle, by way of credentials, and proceeded
to explain that the French King, the Dauphin, Mme. de
Pompadour and practically all the Court, except the Duc
de Choiseul, desired peace with England. They wished
to know the real feeling of England and to adjust matters
with some honour. Madame de Pompadour and Marshal
Belleisle had sent this “ political adventurer” with the
King’s knowledge. The conversation with Yorke lasted
for three hours, but we are concerned neither with the
generalities of the English Envoy nor with the needs of
France.

(2) On March 21 the Earl of Holdernesse informed
General Yorke that George II entirely approved the
manner in which he had conducted the conversation with
Comte de Saint-Germain. The King did not regard it as
improbable that the latter was authorised to talk as he had

484

-- Page 520 --
Saint-Germain and Caghiostro

done by persons of weight in the Councils of France, and
even possibly with the King’s knowledge. Yorke was
directed, however, to inform Saint-Germain that he could
not discuss further such “interesting subjects” unless
Saint-Germain produced some authentic proof that he
was “being really employed with the knowledge and
consent of His Most Christian Majesty.” On that under-
standing only King George IT would be ready to “ open
himself ” as to the conditions of peace.

(3) On April 4 General Yorke reported that Saint-Germain
was still at the Hague but that the Duc de Choiseul had
instructed the French Ambassador to forbid his interference
with anything relating to the political affairs of France and
to threaten him with the consequences if he did.

(4) On May 6 the Earl of Holdernesse wrote to Mr.
Andrew Mitchell, the English Envoy in Prussia, referring
to all that had passed between General Yorke and Comte
Saint-Germain at the Hague; to the formal disavowal of
Saint-Germain by the Duc de Choiseul; and to Saint-
Germain’s decision that he would pass over to England
“in order to avoid the further resentment of the French
minister.” The Earl mentioned also the fact of his
arrival ; his immediate apprehension on the ground that he
was not authorised, “even by that part of the French
Ministry in whose name he pretended to talk”; his
examination, which produced little, his conduct and lan-
guage being “artful”; and the decision that he should
not be allowed to remain in England, in accordance
with which he had apparently been released and had
set out “ with an intention to take shelter in some part of his
Prussian Majesty’s Dominions,” which intention Mr.
Andrew Mitchell was desired, on the King of England’s
part, to communicate to the King of Prussia.

The Mitchell papers by no means stand alone. There is
also extant in the French Record Office of Foreign Affairs

485

-- Page 521 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
certain correspondence on the same subject at the same
period between the Duc de Choiseul and Comte d’Affry,
who will be distinguished tn the following summary by
the letters A and B. (1) The Hague: February 22nd,
1760. From B to A. Saint-Germain is reported at
Amsterdam, claiming to be entrusted with an important
mission on the financial position of France. He is said to
have spent a long time formerly in England and to affect
many peculiarities. (2) March 7th. From B to A. It is
said that Saint-Germain “continues to make the most
extraordinary assertions in Amsterdam.” (3) March toth.
From B to A, stating that Saint-Germain had visited him
at the Hague, using much the same language as he was said
to have used at Amsterdam on the state of French finances
and his intention to save the kingdom, in part by securing
for France the credit of the principal bankers of Holland.
(4) March 14th. From B to A, stating that he had seen
the scheme of Saint-Germain and intends to tell him that
affairs of the kind have nothing to do with the Ministry
with which he—A—is honoured. (5) Versailles: March
19th. From A to B, enclosing a letter from Saint-Germain
to the Marquise de Pompadour, which is described as suffici-
ently exposing ‘‘ the absurdity of the personage.” He is an
adventurer of the first order and seems also to be exceedingly
foolish. B is to warn Saint-Germain that if he chooses
to meddle in politics “ he shall be placed for the rest of his
days in an underground dungeon.” He is to be forbidden
B’s house, and all the foreign ministers as well as the
Amsterdam bankers are to be informed. (6) April 3rd.
From B to A, reporting that M. de Bentinck, “ no longer
seeing M. de Saint-Germain coming to my house, and
knowing that I have openly discredited him, is ready to
disavow him.” (7) April 5th. From B to A. Reports
a visit from Saint-Germain, to whom B communicated the
instructions which he had received from A. Saint-Germain

486

-- Page 522 --
Saint-Germain and Cagliostro
is said to have been overwhelmed, and the two parted, meet-
ing only on one occasion further by the request of B. (8)
April 8th. From B to A. Saint-Germain is reported as
continuing to see Bentinck and as claiming to have a place
in his French Majesty’s councils, Saint-Germain is said
otherwise to be absolutely discredited. (9) Versailles :
April rith. From Ato B. The latter is required by the
King to discredit the so-called Comte de Saint-Germain
in the most humiliating and emphatic manner; and to
arrange for his arrest “through the friendliness of the
States General,” so that he may be transported to France
and “ punished in accordance with the heinousness of his
offence.” (ro) April 17th. From B to A. Reports the
flight of Saint-Germain by the help of M. de Bentinck,
and expresses a belief that he is sorely pressed for money,
having borrowed two thousand florins from a Jew on the
security of three opals. (11) April 25th. From B to A.
Expresses a belief that Saint-Germain has gone to England
and reflects upon the conduct of Bentinck. (12) May Ist.
From Ato B. The writer doubts that the Comte de Saint-
Germain has gone to England, where he is already too well
known. (13) May 12th. From BtoA. It transpires that
Saint-Germain did reach England but was met by a State
messenger who forbade him to proceed further and caused
him to re-embark on the first vessel outward bound, it
being the English minister’s opinion notwithstanding that
the displeasure of French diplomatists against Saint-
Germain was simulated and that he was in reality sent to
assist the cause of Francein London. (14) May 14th. From
B to A. Contradicts the report specified in the previous
letter. Saint-Germain was not stopped at Harwich but
was arrested in London under an order from Pitt; but
having been examined by one of this minister’s chief
clerks, the latter regarded him asa kind of lunatic who
had no evil intention. Saint-Germain was therefore taken
487

-- Page 523 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
certain correspondence on the same subject at the same
period between the Duc de Choiseul and Comte d’Affry,
who will be distinguished in the following summary by
the letters A and B. (1) The Hague: February 22nd,
1760. From B to A. Saint-Germain is reported at
Amsterdam, claiming to be entrusted with an important
mission on the financial position of France. He is said to
have spent a long time formerly in England and to affect
many peculiarities. (2) March 7th. From B to A. It is
said that Saint-Germain “continues to make the most
extraordinary assertions in Amsterdam.” (3) March roth.
From B to A, stating that Saint-Germain had visited him
at the Hague, using much the same language as he was said
to have used at Amsterdam on the state of French finances
and his intention to save the kingdom, in part by securing
for France the credit of the principal bankers of Holland.
(4) March 14th. From B to A, stating that he had seen
the scheme of Saint-Germain and intends to tell him that
affairs of the kind have nothing to do with the Ministry
with which he—A—is honoured. (5) Versailles: March
igth. From A to B, enclosing a letter from Saint-Germain
to the Marquise de Pompadour, which is described as suffici-
ently exposing “‘ the absurdity of the personage.” He is an
adventurer of the first order and seems also to be exceedingly
foolish. B is to warn Saint-Germain that if he chooses
to meddle in politics “ he shall be placed for the rest of his
days in an underground dungeon.” He is to be forbidden
B’s house, and all the foreign ministers as well as the
Amsterdam bankers are to be informed. (6) April 3rd.
From B to A, reporting that M. de Bentinck, “ no longer
seeing M. de Saint-Germain coming to my house, and
knowing that I have openly discredited him, is ready to
disavow him.” (7) April 5th. From B to A. Reports
a visit from Saint-Germain, to whom B communicated the
instructions which he had received from A. Saint-Germain

486

-- Page 524 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

back to Harwich and warned to quit the English shores.
He was now thought to be on his way to Berlin. (15) From
Bto A. March 23rd, 1762. Recalls the Comte de Saint-
Germain, says that he is again in Holland under assumed
names, that he has purchased an estate in Guelders and
suggests that he is making dupes of people, with chemical
secrets, in order to earn a living.

It will be seen that the papers in the French Record
Office of Foreign Affairs give the inner significance of
facts and proceedings to which the Mitchell papers bear
witness. It remains to say concerning the French docu-
ments that my knowledge is derived from Appendix IT
of a work entitled Tue Comte pe Saint-Germain published
at Milan in 1912 by Mrs. Cooper-Oakley. It contains also
some very full abstracts from the Mitchell papers, but
these have been examined on my own part at the British
Museum, as well as other important documents cited by
her at various points of her monograph. It is obvious that
their subject-matter lies far away from the concern of the
present work ; but in view of modern theosophical claims
concerning Saint-Germain and his alleged placein the history
of the Rosy Cross it is desirable to shew under what cir-
cumstances and in what environment we begin to meet with
authentic particulars concerning him.

There is full documentary evidence for the fact that
Louis XV assigned him the Castle of Chambord in 1758
as a place of abode and that he was actually installed thereat
in the month of May. There is also extant a letter from
Saint-Germain to the Marquise de Pompadour, dated
March i1, 1760, which most certainly exhibits his
relations with the Court of Versailles in no uncertain
manner and justifies what is said upon this subject in the
Mitchell correspondence. Furthermore, it presents the
writer as anxious to act in the cause of peace apart from
personal interest. It does not shew, however, that he was

488

-- Page 525 --
Saimt-Germain and Cagliostro
accredited by Versailles after any manner, however in-
formal. ‘This notwithstanding, at the value of such a
tentative view, it seems to me quite possible that he had
a private verbal commission to see if he could arrange
anything in the matter of peace with England behind the
back of the Duc de Choiseul, and that when his attempted
intervention became known to that minister he was thrown
over by the French King, after the best manner of Louis
XV. Whether Saint-Germain shewed any considerable
ability and tact on his own part is another question. Ex-
perience in these later days tells us that the réle of the
professional occultist is seldom set aside by those who have
once adopted it, and it would appear that he had failed
signally at an interview with Pitt’s clerk. However this
may be, Saint-Germain comes before us as an unsuccessful
political emissary who was used at best as a cat’s-paw,
and it must be added that when he addressed the King’s
mistress it was not ut adeptis appareat me illis parem et
fratrem, or

Lofty and passionless as date-palm’s bride,
Set on the topmost summit of his soul.

He tells her that he has spoken to Bentinck of “ the
charming Marquise de Pompadour” from “the fullness of
a heart”? whose sentiments have been long known to
herself, reminds her of the “ loyalty ” that he has sworn to
her and alludes to Louis XV as “ the best and worthiest of
kings.” Jt is not at such cost that adeptship repays the
favour even of a palace at Chambord. Let us now glance
briefly at some other records.

(1) December 9, 1745. Horace Walpole writes to Sir
Horace Mann, stating that “the other day they seized
an odd man who goes by the name of Count St.-Germain.”
He is said to have been in England for two years and had
confessed that he was not passing under his real name, while
refusing all information as to his origin and identity.

489

-- Page 526 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
Walpole acknowledged his great musical abilities but
testifies otherwise that he was mad.1_ We hear from a later
source that he was arrested because some one who was
“jealous of him with a lady slipt a letter in his pocket as
from the Young Pretender . . . and immediately had him
taken up.” It is said that his innocence was proved and
that he was discharged. See Read’s WeEKty JoURNAL OR
British Gazerreer, May 17, 1760, the reminiscence of
1745 arising out of Saint-Germain’s second visit to Eng-
land. (2) He is heard of next at Vienna, “from 1745 to
1746,” with Prince Ferdinand von Lobkowitz, “ first
minister of the Emperor,” as his intimate friend. He
became acquainted with the Maréchal de Belle-Isle, who
“ persuaded him to accompany him on a visit to Paris.”
The authority is J. van Sypesteyn: Husroriscue Erin-
NERUNGEN, 1869. (3) On his own testimony at its value
he was in India for a second time in 1755. (4) It would
appear that he revisited Paris about 1757 and according
to Madame de Genlis her father was a great admirer of
his skill in chemistry.? (5) April 15, 1758. Writing to
Frederick the Great, Voltaire mentions Saint-Germain,
“who will probably have the honour of seeing Your
Majesty in the course of fifty years. He is a man who never
dies and who knows everything.” (6) Notwithstanding
the events of 1760, Saint-Germain is said to have been in
Paris in 1761, and when the Marquise d’Urfé mentioned
the fact to the Duc de Choiseul the latter answered :
il a passé la nuit dans mon cabinet.t (7) Saint-Germain is

1 Lerrers or Horace Warrots, Eart or Orrorb, To Sir Horace Mann,
1833, Vol. II, pp, 108, 109.

2 Comtesse de Genlis: Mimorres Infpirs pour sERvIR A L’HIsTorrEe DES
XVII er XIX# Sibcres, 1825, p. 88.

3 See Beuchot’s edition of Voltaire: CEuvrrs, Vol. LVIII, p. 360. The
letter is numbered cxviii.

4 F. W. Barthold: Dis GrscntcuTLicHEn PERsONLICHKEITEN IN JACOB
Casanova’s Memorren, 1846, Vol. II, p. 94. The Marquise d’Urfé’s story
seems evidently mythical.

49°

-- Page 527 --
Sarat-Germain and Cagliostro
reported at St. Petersburg, presumably circa 1761-2, and
according to the Graf Gregor Orloff he “ played a great
part ” in the Russian Revolution.t (8) In 1763 he was
at Brussels, as appears in a letter of Graf Karl Coblenz,
who regarded him as the most singular man whom he had
ever seen, affirms that he witnessed his transmutation of
iron “into a metal as beautiful as gold,” his preparation
and dyeing of skins, silk, wool, etc., all carried to an extra-
ordinary degree of perfection, as also his composition of
colours for painting.? There is no need to particularise
further: considerable evidence exists for the fact that
Saint-Germain had signal skill in chemistry. (9) If we
can trust the Memoirs of Casanova, and research has
placed them in a better position than criticism had assigned
formerly, Saint-Germain was at Tournay at some later time
in the same year and permitted the famous adventurer
to visit him, when Casanova found him wearing a long
beard and an Armenian dress. (10) Between 1763 and 1769
we have the authority of Dieudonné Thiébault for the
fact that Saint-Germain spent a year in Berlin, where he
became acquainted with Abbé Pernety, who was a con-
siderable figure in Hermeticism and High Grade Masonry
at that period and later. (11) The Graf Max von Lamberg
met him in Venice under an assumed name, engaged in
experiments on flax, and in July, 1770, they were staying
together at Tunis. (12) He is said also to have been at
Leghorn in the same year during a visit of the Russian
fleet, when he wore a Russian uniform “ and was called
Graf Saltikoff by the Graf Alexis Orloff.” I have not met

1C. A. Vulpius: Currosrraren per Literariscy HistoriscHen Vor unp
MirweE tt, 1818, pp. 285, 286.
2 A, Ritter von Arneth: Grar Puirirp CoBLenz UND SEINE Memorren,
1889. See annotation to p. 9.
3 See Thiébault’s Souvenirs DE Vincr Ans vr Sfyour A Berzn, 1813,
4 See von Lamberg’s Mémorrat v’un Monpain, 1775.
491

-- Page 528 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

with confirmation of this story.2 (13) According to Von
Sypesteyn, 1770 is another year in which the Count re-
visited Paris, being after the fall of the Duc de Choiseul.?
(14) The same writer states that Saint-Germain was again
at the Hague in 1774, after the death of Louis XV, and
proceeded thence to Schwalbach, where he carried on
alchemical experiments with the Markgraf, but their
nature and results do not appear. (15) In 1776 it is certain
that he was at Leipzig and at Dresden in the following
year, when Graf Marcolini offered him an important post
in that city, which, however, Saint-Germain refused.
According to a letter of Baron von Wurmb, written on
May 19, 1777, the Count was at that date between sixty
and seventy years old. There is also extant a communica-
tion in his own hand which shews that he was acquainted
with Baron de Bischoffswerder,? whom we shall meet with
again as an active member of the Rosicrucian Order at
the Court of Frederick William II of Prussia. (16) In or
about 1777 Saint-Germain was at Hamburg and after-
wards on a visit to Prince Karl of Hesse, with whom he
engaged in experiments, presumably on various herbs, but
the particulars are vague. (17) The last authentic record
is that of the Church Register of Eckrenférde, which has
this entry : ‘ Deceased on February 27th, buried on March
and, 1784, the so-called Comte de St. Germain and Weldon
—turther information not known—privately deposited in
this Church.” On April 3rd the Mayor and Council of
the town certified that “his effects have been legally
sealed,” that nothing had been ascertained as to the exist-

1 There is no authority in this case beyond that of Mrs. Cooper-Oakley
op. cit., p. 60. It is one of the few instances in which she fails to provide a
reference.
186, Cornelius Ascanius von Sypesteyn : Voxraire, Saint-Germain, etc.,

? Karl von Weber : Aus vier JAHRHUNDERTEN, 1857, pp. 317 ef Seq.

492

-- Page 529 --
Saint-Germain and Cagtiostro
ence of a will, and that his creditors were called upon to
come forward, “with their claims,” on October 14th.
The result of this notice is unknown.?

There are foolish persons who challenge the truth of these
later records, because, according to the protestant Anti-
Mason Eckert, Saint-Germain was invited to attend the
Masonic Congress at Paris in 1785 and that of Wilhelmsbad
in February of the same year, according to another account.
It has not occurred to them that such invitations could be
issued without knowledge that a mysterious and unaccount-
able individual, ever travelling under assumed names, and
ever vanishing out of view with great suddenness, had at
last departed this life in a private manner.? There are
other uncritical persons, and Mrs. Cooper-Oakley is among
them, who take the Comtesse d’Adhémar’s SouvENIRS sUR
Mantz-AnToINETTE? seriously, instead of as an exaggerated
and largely fictitious narrative, no important statement in
which can be accepted, unless it has been checked inde-
pendently. They certify among other marvels innumerable
to the appearance of Saint-Germain and to the fact that
she saw him with her own eyes (1) at the execution of
Marie Antoinette; (2) “at the coming of the 18th
Brumaire”; (3) on the day after the death of the Duc
d’Enghien ; (4) in the month of January, 1813; and (5)

1 Louis Bobé: Joan Caspar Lavater’s Rese T1L DANMARK I SOMMEREN,
1793, published at Copenhagen in 1898, Vol. III, p. 156, cited by Mrs.
Cooper-Oakley, who refers also to Brrtiniscuze Monatscurirr for June,
1785. It may be added that no less a friend than Prince Karl of Hesse is
said to have been not only acquainted with the fact of Saint-Germain’s death
at Eckrenférde but that his illness began while pursuing experiments in
colours, his own apothecary preparing innumerable medicaments for his cure
in vain.—See Tue Tueosopuist, May, 1881, reproducing an article from
ALL THE YEAR Rounp.

2 It may be mentioned that Louis Claude de Saint-Martin was certainly
invited to these Conventions and as certainly did not attend, though many
unequipped writers have said that he did.

3 Published in 1836.

493

-- Page 530 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

“on the eve of the murder of the Duc de Berri,” in 1820.
According to his alleged promise, she was to see him yet
once more and was not to wish for the meeting, meaning
evidently on the eve of her own death. In any case, on
the basis of these statements Saint-Germain survived his
recorded burial in Germany by at least thirty-six years,
and by as many more as we may choose to imagine after
1820. He may have even attended his own funeral in
1784. It is also on Madame d’Adhémar’s unsupported
authority that we hear of Saint-Germain being present at
the Court of Versailies long before herself—that is to say,
in 1743. Notwithstanding her absence she is able to give
an almost microscopical account of his appearance and
especially of his apparel.

We may compare the Curoniques pe v’(Eit ve Beur,!
which is equally explicit on appearances and not less men-
dacious after its own manner.

We hear of a Countess von Gergy, who met him at
Venice in 1710, looking about forty-five years, and fifty
years later she talked to him at the Court of Louis XV, no
older to outward seeming by a single day. When she said
that he must be a devil he was “ seized with a cramp-like
trembling in every limb, and left the room immediately.”
The Baron de Gleichen bears witness also to the Count’s
presence in Venice at the date in question but makes it
clear in his sincerity that he has derived it at second hand.

There are other fables besides those which have been

1 Published in 1845 under the name of G. Touchard-Lafosse.

® Loc. cit, Ricne pe Louis XV, chap. xx, tome 111, pp. 407 et seg. Much
as the supposed authoress of these memoirs, La Comtesse Douairiére de
B....., is acquainted with the Court of Louis XV, she has heard nothing of
Saint-Germain’s residence at Chambord or of his political mission. In her
story of the Régne de Louis XVI, cap. 4, pp. 450, 451, there is an account of
his death, with fabulous details, especially regarding the terrors of his last
moments.

3 Mémoires, published at Paris in 1868.

494

-- Page 531 --
Saint-Germain and Cagliostro

quoted, and when all have been set aside as accretions
which accumulate invariably about occult and mysterious
personalities, the facts which remain are (1) that Saint-
Germain was a wanderer for a considerable period over
the face of Europe; (2) that he had the entrée to most
courts in the countries which he visited, and this
could not have been the case apart from personal and
other high credentials; (3) that although there are no
occult sciences there are secret arts, and there is very full
evidence that he was versed in these ; (4) that for twenty-
six years he was an occasional figure on the stage of public
affairs and that this period was closed by his death. Here
is the plain story, which invention has coloured to its liking.
The inventions are much more interesting than the plain
facts, and I should be very glad if there were evidence of
their truth. There is none, however, and their rejection
is inevitable on this ground, quite apart from @ priori
considerations of the possible and probable, in which I
have no concern when [| write as an historian.

I am of opinion otherwise that Saint-Germain was not
an adventurer in the ordinary sense of the term, that he
was not living by his wits, that during the whole period
of his known activities there is no evidence of dishonourable
conduct and that he was a gentleman of his time who
acted throughout as such. Those who represent him as
making preposterous claims on his own behalf are those
precisely whose accounts in particular and in general
cannot be accepted on their own warrants and no others are
forthcoming. At the same time it is well within possibility
that he may have claimed considerable occult powers and
may perhaps have possessed some, seeing that such powers
exist. Voltaire’s scoffing allusion indicates the kind of
rumours that were abroad, and whatever they owed to
invention their opportunity could have been provided only
by Saint-Germain himself. His chemical and herbal

495

-- Page 532 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
knowledge is vouched for fairly well, but does not enter
into the consideration. On the other hand, there is also
no evidence that he was a man of spiritual experience and
much less a mystic in the sense, let us say, of Saint-Martin.
He was an occult personality of his period, and whatever
his faculties of this kind—if indeed he had such faculties—
they could count for nothing on the mystic path of adept-
ship. For these reasons and on these grounds I do not accept
the judgment of his personal friend, the Landgrave Charles,
Prince of Hesse, when he affirms that Saint-Germain “ was
perhaps one of the greatest philosophers who ever lived ” :1
it is open to question whether the deponent had any valid
canon of distinction on such a subject. But as nothing
can be found to the contrary in authentic records of the
past, and as it postulates nothing that is in the least unlikely
or the least uncommon, I accept and welcome the judgment
when the Prince of Hesse affirms otherwise (1) that Saint-
Germain was “the friend of humanity,” desiring money
only that he might give to the poor; (2) that he was a
friend to animals; and (3) that “ his heart was concerned
only with the happiness of others.” For the rest, it seems
to me that his own account of himself, which is not wholly
unsupported and has reasonable inferences in its favour,
may be accepted provisionally, and according to this he
was a son of Prince Rakéczy of Transylvania. It seems
fairly certain also that in his earlier life he was under the
powerful protection of the Duc de Medici. He adopted
innumerable aliases during his life-long travels, and some
of them may have been dictated by prudence, but others
are more readily explicable by the love of mystery for its
own sake. It is inalienable from the professional occultist,
especially of that period, and if its connotation is a
passion for pose, it must be said that Saint-Germain
had dispositions of this kind. They are significant of

1 MéEmorres DE Mon Temps, 1861.
496

-- Page 533 --
Saint-Germain and Caghostro
folly, but I have followed the tracks of occult adeptship
through all the Christian centuries and I have not found
wisdom.

Saint-Germain was a man of his period and a figure in
the great world. As such in the eighteenth century he
was of course a Freemason. I have quoted elsewhere
Casanova’s shrewd advice to those who in his time—being
that time—had an ambition to make their way: if they
were not Masons already, they must become such ; it was
a condition of future prosperity. Saint-Germain had
obviously no way to make, but he had a position to maintain,
being that of a great occult virtuoso and master of his
period, and all sorts and conditions of occultism were
gathered in that day under one or other of the Masonic
banners. He is described as an “ eager’ Freemason by
the Landgraf von Hessen-Phillips-Barchfeld, but I find
no record of activities, except in suspicious sources. There
is nothing to shew that Cadet de Gassicourt was speaking
from first-hand knowledge when he describes Saint-Germain
as travelling for the Knights Templar, to establish communi-
cation between their various Chapters or Preceptories—
—a reference either to the Rite of Perfection or the Strict
Observance. On the other hand, the great vogue of the
Strict Observance makes it not antecedently improbable
that he belonged to it as part of his concern, though I
cannot regard as genuine a letter which he is supposed to
have written to Count Gértz and in which there is reference
to this Rite. If, however, Saint-Germain was drawn into
Masonry as part of his business, it must be confessed that
he would be attracted still more strongly by the Rosicrucian
Order, and there is evidence that on one occasion he appeals
to Bischoffswerder, a militant member of the Fraternity,
as one who knew and would speak for him. There is
nothing to be inferred from this except a precarious pos-
sibility, and otherwise there is a complete blank in all the

2K 497

-- Page 534 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
records, which never mention the Rosy Cross, in connection
with Saint-Germain or otherwise.

The lacuna thus created has been filled, however, to the
brim by occult speculation, expressed as usual in terms of
more or less complete certitude. We know too well already
that whensoever it has proved convenient every one who
practised alchemy was ipso facto a Rosicrucian, every one
who wrote about elementary spirits or was supposed to
have commerce with these belonged to the Order. The
flagitious rule obtained naturally enough in the case of
Saint-Germain, but the myth of his membership has been
the subject of special effort in the forcing-house of modern
theosophy. Out of a casual and unsupported affirmation
of Madame Blavatsky, who says that Saint-Germain was
in possession of a Rosicrucian cipher-manuscript, Mrs.
Cooper-Oakley leaps to the conclusion that he occupied a
high position in the Brotherhood and talks vaguely of his
connection with alleged branches of the Order or develop-
ments therefrom in Bohemia, Austria and Hungary. She
maintains that these things are proven, but how or by whom
does not appear in the statement. It is presumably the kind
of proof which she met with in a German occult periodical,
according to which Vienna at that period was swarming
with Rosicrucians, [luminati, Alchemists and Templars,
whence it follows that during his visits to that city he could
not fail to come in touch with many “ mystagogues,”
especially in a certain Rosicrucian laboratory, where he is
said to have instructed his Brethren “in the science of
Solomon.”? She may have remembered also that Le Lotus
Burvu (1895), a French Theosophical Review, described the
Rosicrucians as “ perhaps the most mysterious Fraternity
ever established on western soil,” and obviously therefore
a fitting asylum for a professional man of mystery.

It would serve little purpose to quote the fantastic
memorials at large, but they have grown from more to

498

-- Page 535 --
Saint-Germain and Cagliostro

more with the effluxion of time, and so it comes about that
in the foolish account of the Order published as No. 2 of
the Golden Rule Manuals! we hear of the hand of Saint-
Germain being traceable in the formation or guidance not
only of Mystic and Masonic, but of many Rosicrucian bodies,
as it would seem, anywhere and everywhere at the end of
the eighteenth century. The source of these inventions
is not in the records of the past which are known to history
but rather in those Akasic Records to which I have referred
in my first chapter. They must be left or taken as such,
remembering the kind of deponent who skries in that
psychic sea. If the Graf Rakéczy is known to certain
theosophists at this day in a physical body ; if he testifies that
he is the Comte de Saint-Germain ; if Saint-Germain was
Francis, Lord Verulam; and if Verulam was Christian
Rosy Cross ; it is obvious that the French occult personality
of the eighteenth century knew better and more about
the mysterious Order than any one else in the world and
must have come into his own in every Lodge and House
of Initiation that he happened to visit. But outside the
Akasic Records there are those of German Rosicrucianism
at the close of the eighteenth century, and they have not
one word to tell us on the presence or activities of the
Comte de Saint-Germain. In this dilemma I am content to
leave the issue.

J have now to consider for a moment the case of Count
Cagliostro. Whether he is to be identified with Joseph
Balsamo—that cheerful Sicilian rogue—as affirmed by the
Holy Inquisition, or whether he appeared suddenly in
France and London in the réle of an occult personality,
his antecedents and identity unknown, as Mr. ‘Trowbridge
has tried earnestly to prove,” are not alternatives which call

1 Tue Rosrcrucians, already cited on several occasions.

2 This apologist for Cagliostro weaves a thin romance of his own about
the Rosicrucians and has scarcely a vestige of evidence for anything that he

499

-- Page 536 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

for discussion in this place. The question is whether he
also, like Saint-Germain, came out of the hiddenness as a
Master of the Rosy Cross, for this is the story concerning
him, and though it has been in no wise invented by modern
occultists it is cherished near to their hearts. The original
of the mythos is to be found in a sensational romance,
published anonymously but attributed to the Marquis de
Luchet.!' It belongs to the year 1785, and the scene of the
episode is Holstein, where Cagliostro and Lorenza, his
wife, are represented as visiting Saint-Germain and being
received by him into the “ sect ” of the Rosy Cross. That
which they learned, however, was (1) that the Great Art
is the government of men ; (2) that its secret is never to tell
them the truth ; (3) that they must get wealth but dupes
above all. In a word the account is a comedy, but it set in
motion a belief that Cagliostro claimed connection with the
Order. There is no particle of evidence that he did. On
the contrary the Rosy Cross would have dissolved for him in
the higher and more ancient light of Egyptian Mysteries,
and what he actually pretended was that he had been
initiated at the foot of the Pyramids into the secret wisdom
of Osiris, Isis and Anubis. His Rite of Masonry drew, by its
hypothesis, from these sources and owes nothing to the
later institution. When a catechism attached to its Second
Degree describes the Sacred Rose as a symbol of the First
Matter of Alchemy we are far removed from the field of
Rosicrucian symbolism.

Having disposed in this manner of the chief occult
personalities who figured in France during the second half
of the eighteenth century there remains only Martines de
Says, as, c.g., concerning their far-reaching influence. He explains that
“contentment ” was the Philosophical Stone of the Order, which is taking
Addison’s rather dubious story literally.

1 Mémoires AUTHENTIQUES POUR SERVIR 4 w’HistorrE pu ComTE
Cactiostro.

500

-- Page 537 --
Saint-Germain and Cagliostro
Pasqually, whose Rite of the Elected Priesthood had at least
one Rosicrucian Grade high up in its Ritual sequence. We
know practically nothing concerning it, though John
Yarker in one of his most confused moments seems to
suggest that he has seen it.t In such case, the procedure
included a baptism and apparently a rank in chivalry, for
the candidate became in his reception a Knight Rose-
Croix, as in the Eighteenth Degree. There was also an
Historical Discourse in which it was affirmed (1) that
natural philosophy was the object of research in the Order ;
(2) that its origin was lost in remote time ; (3) that the Rose
and other symbols, displayed in the Lodge or Temple,
represented the vivifying light which renews itself
incessantly, but also the everlasting benevolence of the
Divine Source; (4) that the Rose in union with the Cross
signified the mixed joys and pains of life, “ indicating
that our pleasures, to be lasting, should have delicacy, and
that they are of short duration when delivered over to
excess.” [think better of Pasqually than to believe that these
puerilities entered into the highest Grade of his Rite. They
have the flavour of Memphis or Mizraim in the annals of
Masonic folly. I should add that Pasqually claimed to
derive from Unknown Superiors and at the beginning of
his Masonic career he carried a hieroglyphical charter.
It may be mere speculation to suggest that it had a Rosi-
crucian source, but it doesnot offend probability, and at
need I should take this view rather than conclude that a
man of his blameless life sought to make capital out of a
forged document. Otherwise he drew from elsewhere, and
in such case his Rose-Croix Grade may have been one more
item added to the long list of developments from the
Eighteenth Degree. It would doubtless owe much also to

1 This at least is the inference to be drawn from an account of the Rite
which appeared in Tue Kwern, No. 45.
50%

-- Page 539 --
CHAPTER XVIII
FRATRES LUCIS

J HAvE met with no first-hand memorials of the Golden
and Rosy Cross in the second half of the eighteenth
century, excepting the Rituals which arose out of the
Reformation of or about 1777.1. We do not know certainly
whether that reform came about in the course of a natural
development, as for example in exchanging the astral
workings for those of alchemical experiment, or whether
it was the result of disruption. It was a stormy period, and
the history of Secret Societies—Masonic or otherwise—
indicates that titles of adeptship may have had many
claims on the good pleasure of Divine favour and recogni-
tion but they had few upon the peace of God. I conclude
that the Golden and Rosy Cross underwent a revolution
which it characterised by a different name. There is
another point of uncertainty. We have no means of
determining whether the circle about which we have

1 My reference is to official documents, actual or assumed. An important
memorial belonging to the period itself, although at the last end, is H. C.
Albrecht’s Grnerme Gerscuicute EmNEs Rosenxreuzers, from their own
documents, published at Hamburg in 1792. Itis concerned entirely with the
post 1777 period and in particular with (1) the revelations of a certain
Cedrinus ; (2) the history of Freemasonry ; (3) the Order of the Temple ;
(4) the Convention of Wilhelmsbad; (5) a Rosicrucian romance called
Don Syzvio; (6) an Appress to the Rosicrucians of the Old System,
belonging to the year 1781 and connected with an attempt by Fraxinus to
establish or revive the Rosy Cross in Vienna, the nature of which experiment
was exposed by Cedrinus ; (7) the activities of Theoretical Brethren ; and
(8) the Puystca Mystica and Puysica Sacra Sanctissima of Johann
Gottfried Jugel.

503

-- Page 540 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
learned so much owing to the survival of its Rituals was the
only one of its kind in Germany and otherwhere on the
Continent of that period. ‘There may have been several
branches admitting no allegiance to one another, but
following their own path. In any case the Order survived,
and there came a time when two of its important members
—-who were not, however, Supreme Superiors within the
initiated circle—were the chief advisers of Frederick
William II, with their hands on the helm of the Prussian
ship of state. I refer to Johann Rudolf Bischoffswerder
and Johann Christoph Wéllner.1 The King himself had
been received within the ranks, and for a period of eleven
years there was the strange spectacle of a Rosicrucian
triad ruling over the destinies of an European kingdom.
But this period began in 1786 and the initiation of
Bischofiswerder must have taken place—under whatever
Obedience of the Order—prior to 1773 ; that of Wéllner is
altogether uncertain ; it may have been subsequent to the
King’s reception, which is referable to circa 1780. I do
not propose to pursue this subject because it offers nothing
to my purpose and information concerning it is available
in many quarters.2- We are told that the King was a tool

1 Bischoffswerder was a native of Saxony, and was born on Nov. 13, 1741.
He had been in the service of the Duke of Courland prior to that of the King,
and before he became a Rosicrucian he belonged to the Strict Observance and
many of the Secret Rites. He died in 1803. Wéllner was born at Dobritz in
1732 and belonged to the Lutheran ministry. He entered the service of the
Prussian King in 1786 as Privy Councillor of Finance. He died on September
11, 1800.

* Mr. Gilbert Stanhope’s Mystic on THe Prussian THRONE, 1912, gives
an excellent general account, with a long list of authorities ; but it should be
understood that the writer neither has nor claims acquaintance with Rosi-
crucian history, outside the place and period with which he is concerned.
As regards these the following summary particulars will clear up the
chief issues, and those who are concerned further may be referred to Mr.
Stanhope’s work. (1) Bischoffswerder had served during the Seven Years’
War and again in the Bavarian campaign, at the end of which he was
attached to the suite of Frederick William, then Prince of Prussia. (2) He
had attained already a high position in the Rosicrucian Fraternity and was

504

-- Page 541 --
Fratres Lucts
in the hands of his brother-adepts and that Wollner in
particular must be called his evil genius. In both cases,
however, they were working for their own ends and not for
those of the Order. This point seems perfectly clear from
all that we know of their history. I set aside, of course, the
bare possibility that the King’s treasury might at need have
furnished money to the heads of the Rosy Cross through
the influence of his two advisors, but no suggestion of the
a firm believer in the healing power of an elixir known to the Order. (3) It
was used in an illness which befell the Prince, and his recovery was attributed
toits virtues. (4) Bischoffswerder thereupon induced him to join the Order,
concerning which it is said that the real leaders worked in secrecy, exacting
implicit obedience: ina word, they were Unknown Superiors. (5) Delighted
as they were—this is of course speculation—at the advent of a royal recruit,
they imposed on him a year’s probation—as it is said, ‘‘ to impress him more
deeply with the sanctity and seriousness of their authority.” (6) On their
own part, as stated at an Order-Convocation and mentioned in the text
above, they looked upon his advent from the standpoint of its possible
spiritual profit, in view of his exalted position. (7) Bischoftswerder is re-
garded as sincere, at least at that time; but Wéllner, the son of a pastor,
had belonged to the rationalistic party which flourished under Frederick
the Great, and is thought to have entered the Order for the furtherance
of his own schemes. (8) When Frederick William ascended the throne
in 1786 he desired a return to the “ orthodox religion,” and Wéllner co-
operated. (9) The number of Rosicrucians and mystics multiplied about
the new King, and their influence was resented by many of the German
princes, including Duke Frederick of Brunswick and Prince Eugéne of
Wirtemberg. (10) Such was the entourage of Frederick William II, so far as
occult circles were concerned; but if the Rosy Cross in Prussia does not
shine in any favonravle light, there is nothing to shew that its representatives
at the German CouM were doing anything but play for their own hands,
Mr. Stanhope says that the reactionary tendency of Austria made it sympa-
thetic to Bischoftswerder, who regarded it as “ a bulwark of monarchical and
ecclesiastical authority against the approaching tide of liberalism in religion
and politics.” But this at least exhibits a Rosicrucian on the less intolerable
of two sides when neither made for goodness. Moreover, the case against
Wéollner may call for amendment. It is possible for a rationalist to be
sincere when he turns to things represented by the religious side of the Rosy
Cross. When he said in a Circle of the Order : “ O my Brethren, the time is
not far off when we may hope that the long-expected Wise Ones will teach us
and bring us into communion with High and Invisible Beings ”’—it is
scarcely fair to suggest that this was a mere pose. In any case the statement
is valuable for my own purpose, as it shews that he was addressing a Lodge of
Expectation, a Lodge of Quest, not one of attainment.
505

-- Page 542 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

kind has been made from any direction. On the contrary,
it would seem that the advantage of a royal patron and
member was regarded in another light, for—at the value
of such records—it is in evidence that the Master of a
House or Temple at Hamburg, speaking in the name of the
Highest Superiors, welcomed im absentia a Brother, then
newly joined, under the name of Ormesus Magnus, as one
who might be able to advance the Kingdom of Christ and
the spread of the Order—presumably as a herald of His
reign to come. Now Ormesus Magnus was the mystic
name of Frederick William II as a Brother of the Rosy
Cross.1

Meanwhile the Reformation of 1777 had by no means
eliminated undesirables or malcontents.2. The impostor

1 That of Bischoffswerder was Farferus Phocus Vibron de Hudlohn, while
Wallner was known as Chrysophiron in outer circles and Helioconus at the
ruling centre. The King’s sacramental title, having regard to its claim on
fabulous inventions of the past was most certainly provided or conferred and
not chosen by himself. It indicates the hope of the Order in his respect.

* Though Findel knew little of the Rosicrucian subject, and in view of
his Masonic hypotheses found little reason for knowing, he has drawn facts
belonging to the period under review from various quarters and aids in the
extension of our knowledge. (1) We hear of Dr. Schluss of Léwenfeld,
Sulzbach, Bavaria, called Phocon in the Order, and Dr. Doppelmayer of
Hof as “stars of the first magnitude ” in what is denominated “the new
Order ”—otherwise in “ the latter half of the eighteenth century.” (2) As
regards Schrepfer, who was a native of Niirnberg, it is said that he was the
first who became a public apostle of the “ Golden Rosicrucian Order,” but
this was before the Reformation—an event with which Findel seems
unacquainted—and before it is possible to speak, even incorrectly, of a new
Order. (3) Schrepfer shot himself on October 8, 1774, at the age of thirty-
five. (4) He is said to have confessed previously that he was an emissary of
the Jesuits, Findel having a mania in this direction, and almost anything
served as evidence. (5) There is a story of Schréder—but I know not which
is intended of the two Masonic celebrities who bore the name—and accord-
ing to this he became acquainted with the Rosicrucians and “their first
three Degrees” through an unknown alchemist. (6) He is said to have
propagated the Order zealously till he lost the address of the person with
whom he was directed to communicate. (7) This is on the authority of
Lenning, and if the story is not a myth, the Schréder in question can hardly
be he whom we shall meet with in the next chapter. (8) The activities of the

506

-- Page 543 --
Fratres Lucts
Schrepfer is an example of the first class: his pretended
evocations made him the comet of a season and there must
be some ground on which he called himself a Rosicrucian,
for he seems to have been acknowledged by Bischoffswerder,
who ought to have known a fellow-initiate. The mal-
contents also were in evidence, and this fact led to the
establishment of other Rites and Orders by what may
be called a process of segregation. They were made in the
likeness of their original and advanced corresponding
claims, e.g., to hold the key of Masonic Symbolism, possess-
ing therefore all its secrets, or to represent the true and
original Order of the Rosy Cross. We have seen that there
were similar pretensions in France, but they owed nothing
to each other and in all probability knew nothing of each
other’s existence. Three years after the Reformation, or
Brotherhood caused the Order to take root in Lower Germany—especially
Hamburg ; it appeared in Silesia circa 1773, at Berlin in 1777, and soon after
at Potsdam, which became its headquarters. (9) The members claimed
direct derivation from the old establishment, and the inheritance of all its
secrets, including the only solution of Masonic symbols. (10) About 1782
it is stated that Wéllner placed himself at the head of the “new Order,”
using three different names in the three different Degrees : this is exceedingly
doubtful and Findel has admitted previously that the Degrees were nine.
(11) According to certain MSS. in the possession of a Dr. Puhlmann, Wé6llner
corresponded with members at a distance and promoted greatly the extension
of the Order. (12) But the Bertiner Monatscurirt exposed the propa-
ganda and declared the whole thing an invention of the Jesuits. (13) In
addition to attacks like this, the Order is affirmed to have carried within it the
seeds of its own destruction—of what kind does not appear. (14) But when
it became evident that the subjection of German Masonic Lodges to its
yoke was beyond all expectation, a command went forth in 1787 from
Southern Germany, enjoining the suspension of activities. (15) The event
coincided with the time when “ the credulous were anticipating the last and
most important disclosures of that new and general plan which had been
promised them.” (16) In the North the Rosicrucians survived till the
Prussian crown “ changed hands,” dying out in 1797-98. (17) I can see no
reason for reliance upon these statements, which indicate a Rosicrucian
headship in the South apart from that of the North, after placing Wollner in
charge of the whole Order. (18) As a fact, there seems no evidence for
regarding Potsdam as the Rosicrucian headquarters or Wéllner as more than
the chief of a single province.
597

-- Page 544 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

circa 1780, Clavel says that a last schism in the Order
produced the Initiated Brothers of Asia in Austria and
Italy, but coincidently therewith or proceeding immediately
therefrom was an association of Fratres Lucis, otherwise
Knights of Light, and this shall be the subject of investiga-
tion in the first place as considerable consequence has been
attached to it in some modern occult circles. It has been
named by a few continental historians of Freemasonry and
has figured in a few lists, like those of Ragon, but there was
no knowledge concerning it till the late Mrs. Isabel Cooper-
Oakley took up the subject with that earnestness which
always characterised her excursions in research. She had
unfortunately no critical faculty and her sense of evidential
values made her judgments worthless, but she was to be
trusted implicitly about facts within her first-hand know-
ledge, and if she said that a document was in her hands, it
was most certainly there. The point is of vital importance
in the present connection.

Her study of the Fratres Lucis was based by Mrs. Oakley
on one of many rare MSS. which were once in the library
of the late Count Wilkoroki of Warsaw. In connection with
the Rosy Cross in Russia, we shall see that this library was
looted by Catherine II, but Mrs. Oakley found access to
the collection, which is or was in the Imperial Library at
Petrograd. It would seem also that she was permitted
or found it possible to make extracts or a transcript in full,
for she states that the documents belonging to the Fratres
Lucits passed—apparently from herself—into the charge
of a member of the Theosophical Society, “ having
been committed to his care for possible future use.”
Many years have elapsed, however, and it does not
appear that any result has followed. The original MS.
claimed to comprise or embody the system of the Wise,
Mighty and Reverend Order of the Knights or
Brothers of Light, working five Degrees, the titles and

508

-- Page 545 --
Fratres Lucis
content of which will appear immediately.1 It was either
divided formally or falls naturally for purposes of con-
sideration into two main sections—otherwise the Laws
of the Order and the Rituals worked thereby.

The second division of the manuscript contains the
Ceremonies of the Order in what is presumably a rough
outline or at least summary form. Preliminary to the whole
appear the general conditions on which reception is possible
and may become actual. They may be enumerated in the
following order: (1) As in the Brotherhood of the Golden
and Rosy Cross, Candidates must be Master Masons,
raised in a regular Lodge; (2) they must be free from
physical defects, thus recalling the whole manhood required
by the Craft itself, but the stipulation in the present case
connotes something more than perfect limbs, this being
insured already by the first condition: it is possible that
there is a sex-implicit ; (3) they must not be initiates of any
other Secret Order: alternatively they must resign there-
from, but it is unlikely that this undertaking was fulfilled
by the Heads of the Fratres Lucis; (4) they must be at
least twenty-seven years of age or otherwise Master Masons
of seven years’ standing, thus intimating that minors
were eligible for Masonic initiations at the place and time ;
(5) they must not be oppressors of the poor ; (6) they must
not be disputatious and quarrelsome, or must have repented
sincerely, as the banal_clause adds; (7) they must submit
to a probation of seven months, five of which would be

1 Fach Degree was called a Chapter and membership was graded on
reducing multiples of the number 27. That of the First Degree was
27 X 5=135 ; of the Second 27 X4—=108 ; of the Third 27 X 3=—81 ; of the
Fourth 27 X2=54; of the Fifth 27 X1=27. It will be seen that according
to so-called theosophical addition the number 9 ruled throughout, e.g.,
27-==2-+7= 9, and so forward. According to Fliphas Lévi, the number 9 is
that of initiation, while in Martinism it is of evilimport ; but there is neither
harmony nor analogy between the numerous competitive systems of occult
numerology, except in the sense that they appear to be at once arbitrary
and worthless.

509

-- Page 546 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
occupied by the Superiors of the Order with inquiries
into their Masonic conduct and reputation. ‘The significance
of these rules is to be sought in all that is omitted rather
than anything that is expressed: it will be seen that they
turn upon questions of moral fitness, Craft status and
tolerably good citizenship. ‘There is no word as to spiritual
qualifications, religious aims or attainments, although—
by the hypothesis of its Grades—the Rite was one of
priesthood. Supposing that the Intelligence Department
reported favourably the seven-months’ child of its con-
cern might then be born into the Order.

On the day fixed for his reception the Candidate was
placed in a vestibule, where he was proved in the Three
Craft Degrees, after which he was passed to the Chamber
of Reception, otherwise the Chapter House, and there
signed the following preliminary Pledge: “I, N. N,,
Master Mason, do promise in the Name of the one God,
and by the duty of an honest man, that I will respect all
the Mysteries and will observe all the Statutes which shall
be imposed upon me by the Reverend, Wise and Worthy
Chapter of Knights and Brothers of Light, Novices of the
third year, and will hold them as a revelation of the ultimate
forces of Nature, even if they seem difficult to follow and
dealing with unheard of things.” The execution of this
undertaking entitled the Candidate to be acquainted with
the Laws under which he must abide as a Novice. These
may be summarised as follows: (1) He was required to
abstain from any action which might militate against the
Order itself, its Chapters or its Grades; (2) to exhibit
dutiful submission—as pledged—in respect of all its Laws ;
(3) to prosecute its Mysteries throughout the days of his
life, because they emanate from the True Light; (4)
to ask nothing respecting their source or those by whom
they have been delivered; (5) to maintain, so far as may
be possible, the Three Degrees of Freemasonry, sceing that

510

-- Page 547 --
Fratres Lucts
they are the Elementary School of the Sublime Order ;
(6) to guard and shield the Reverend, Mighty and Wise
Order itself.

Having signified his adhesion to these undertakings in
writing, the Novice was then escorted into the Chapter
itself, where he was questioned as to when and by whom he
had been made a Mason, and as to his age in the Master
Grade. The Headship being familiar already with these
points of his career, the testimony was exacted presumably
for the information of those who were auditors. Having
been given and approved, an Officer denominated the ~
Corrector of Novices called the Chapter to prayer by
sounding a bell. The Invocation which follows has,
however, been mangled in translation or is represented
badly by the original.t ‘ Thy Name, O God our Creator,
is known throughout the earth,? and we give Thee thanks
in Heaven. Out of the mouth of babes Thou hast estab-
lished. Thy strength against Thine enemies, that Thou
mightest put to silence the accuser and the avenger.? [
behold the heavens, the work of Thine hands, the moon
and the stars which Thou hast made. They that have
ears let them hear what the Spirit saith unto the Churches :
To him that overcometh I will give to eat of the Tree of
Life which is in the Paradise of God.5 And to the Angel
of the Church of Smyrna write, saying: This is the first
and the last, He that was dead and shall live again.® They

1 T speak under certain reserves: there it no end to the follies and
confusions of minor Masonic Rituals, as there is no end to the common-
places and ineptitudes of those which rank as major. The Invocation above is,
in any case, a mere chaos of Scripture-quotations.

* Cf. Ps. viii, 1: “ How excellent is Thy Name in all the earth.”

3 [bid., 2: “Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings hast Thou
ordained strength because of Thine enemies, that Thou mightest still the
enemy and the avenger.”

4 CE. ibid., 3.

5 ApocaLypst i, 7.

8 Tbid., 8, but read : “ which was dead and is alive.”

511
~“

-- Page 548 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
that have ears, etc. (repeated). ‘To him that overcometh
I will give of the hidden manna, and I will give him a good
testimony written in his name (sic), but none shall know
it save he that owneth it.1 For all this hath the Lord
spoken, and the word of the Lord is pure, even as pure silver,
purged seven times.””?

The Corrector of Novices then exhorted the Candidate,
bidding him pray to “ the good elements of all creatures
that the One and the Three and the Five and* * * * * * *
may be with us and that they may direct thee on the path
which thou hast entered.” Robing and unrobing followed,
with the recitation of a Psalm, which is not otherwise
specified. The Candidate was then warned that he had
been brought within the secret circle in order that he might
study the Laws of Divine Wisdom, Justice, Mercy and
Power. He was called upon to abide among his Brethren in
sincerity of heart, with the spirit of goodwill and sub-
mission, with love and devotion to the true ends of the
Order. In the fulfilment of these conditions it was said
that he would be taught “‘ our Mysteries ” fully and would
be directed to that point when he himself should enter the
light. On the faith of this prospect he ratified another
Pledge as follows: “I, N. N., do swear by the one law of
the True and Unknown Being that I will continue through
all my life in fidelity to the duties of Knights and Brothers
of Light. If I violate even one of them, may my Superiors,
by the miraculous power of Magic, render me the most
pitiable of all creatures. May the powers of evil rise up
against me for ever, the cruel spirits which hide themselves
from the light. May the powerful Princes of Darkness
assemble about me all terrors of darkness, to encompass me
as with acloud. May they expel all light from my spirit, my

1 Apocatypss, 17, but read : “ will give him a white stone, and in the stone
a new name written, which no man knoweth saving he that receiveth it.”

2 Cf. Ps. xvii, 6. ‘

512

-- Page 549 --
Fratres Lucts
soul and my body, and may the Source of Good, which is
One and Three, shut me out for ever from its mercy.”

The Signs and Passwords are communicated in the next
place, after which another Master of Novices delivers the
Historical Discourse. It affirms the existence of various
occult Societies from past times immemorial and under
various names. In all cases their knowledge and objects
were concealed in hieroglyphics, and thus reserved to the
elect. The centre was always in Asia, and there on a day it
came about that certain Knights were admitted who
took part in the war against Saracens under the Banner of
the Cross. They learned after this manner many mysteries
in Asia, but the time came when part of them perished
under a thousand tortures. ‘The reference is of course to the
suppression of the Knights Templar, whose story is told in
brief. It is added that out of this ruin there arose what is
called the Radiz, otherwise Knights of St John, as also “‘ the
German Order ”—presumably ‘Teutonic Knights—and the
Golden Fleece.2- The wreckage of the Templar Mysteries
was inherited by these Associations. Apparently, however,
they were not the only heirs, for it is said that the Order of
Freemasons, more ancient than any of the above, is that
which has best preserved the hieroglyphics of Templar
Knights. The Temple of Solomon was their most catholic
symbol of all, yet it was used by the Chivalry itself, the
Sanctuary of Israel being divided apparently into symbolic
portions corresponding to the Grades of the Knighthood.

1 In the imposition of such a Pledge the Order of Fraires Lucis is
condemned out of its own mouth, for it is certain that nothing true and of
good report would require a Candidate to invoke an eternal judgment on
himself. The Masonic Rites and Degrees are content with penal clauses
which threaten the destruction or maiming of the body.

2 We have seen that the Order of the Golden Fleece originated in 1429 in
connection with an event belonging to that date and to nothing else; the
Knights of St. John were founded in 1124 ; and the Teutonic Knights in
1191. It follows that none of these institutions “arose ” out of the suppres-
sion of the Templars in 1307.

21 513

-- Page 550 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

The discourse is confused at this point and it is scarcely
possible to understand what is intended. We hear of moral
interpretations applied by Templars to sacraments and
picture-symbols. It recurs then to Masonry and affirms
without further preface that its real objects have been
invariably those of Alchemy, Theosophy and Magia, but
they have not been pursued owing to the ignorance of
Brethren. The Fratres Lucis were, however, in a position
to intervene and atone for this deficiency, by means of
clear instructions, which would be given to deserving
Novices.

In this manner the claim of the Order itself begins to
emerge distinctly for the first time, and thereafter the
Discourse proceeds to explain the Entered Apprentice
Degree of Craft Masonry. The dark room used prior to
reception signifies that the First Matter of the Great
Work is found in a black earth. It is an earth which con-
tains no metals, and these are removed from the Candidate
prior to his reception for this reason. When he is divested
of various garments the reason is that “ Our Matter is
stripped of the veil that Nature has given it.” It is said
also that it can be “ drawn as from the breast of a mother.”
When the shoe also is removed the reference is to a certain
mystical severance and is “one of the most ancient
hieroglyphics known to the Israelites,” being connected
with the refusal to take the wife of a deceased brother, the
renunciation of an inheritance, and so forth. The battery
which is made upon the floor as a token of affirmation or con-
sent to the reception of Candidates “ signifies that we
procure our Matter from its habitation in a volcano and
that the Order has for its chief objects the physical mysteries
wrought by fire.” The hoodwink indicates that although
the First Matter is luminous, shining and clear in itself,
yet it can be found only in a most darksome abode—mean-
ing the black earth already mentioned. The three circum-

514

-- Page 551 --
Fratres Lucis

ambulations which are made in the course of reception are
called “laborious journeys” and with their connected
discourses and procedure are not interpreted alchemically :
they signify? the obedience, fidelity and silence which must
be shewn towards Chiefs, as well as “ the toils, reflections,
upright heart and open soul,” by which only the Novice
can hope to rise towards them. But it is obvious that this
is a blundering digression which has forgotten that its
business of interpretation is at work on a Craft Grade. The
confusion persists throughout the following clauses. The
point of the sword making contact with the breast is a
reminder that “‘ no two-edged weapon must ever be used
to slay our Hiram and obtain his precious blood, which is
shewn afterwards by a ‘ weak’ Brother and his blood-stained
handkerchief.” Jt is affirmed that this unintelligible
reference—which has no Masonic application in our own
day—is explained to the Knight-Novice of the seventh
year. The silence preserved in the Lodge intimates that
“our Matter,” after its due preparation, operates the
dissolution of all metals in stillness. “The compasses brought
forward on a plate of blood and afterwards applied to the
Candidate, with the subsequent elevation of the plate,
intimate that “we have another poniard,” being that
which “ we thrust into the bosom of our matter ” and cause
it to pour forth blood.” Whatsoever is repeated thrice in-
dicates that the Matter is animal, vegetable and mineral.
Finally, the name of Thooelkam (stc), conferred on the
Candidate in virtue of his admission, is another reference to
the fact that “our Matter lies where the volcano has its
fire and its dwelling.”

The Tracing-Board offers an opportunity for further
confusion between Masonic symbolism and that of the

1 Tt is said alternatively that the path, according to its affirmed
significance, can be found only in secrecy, after great trials, and by firm and
fearless constancy.

515

-- Page 552 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
Fratres Lucis. ‘The four cardinal points or quarters in-
timate that God has endowed the Chiefs of the Order
with such wisdom that they are raised above all mortality,
and that to them nothing is unknown. The four principal
winds, considered as symbols, offer the same lesson. When
the Smaragdine Tablet testifies that “the wind bears it in
its belly,” the meaning is: “I carry the Matter, for it is
the source and end of all things.” The border and the
pointing finger are said to denote “ our unchangeableness,”
but this seems pure nonsense. ‘The Masonic flooring
reveals the well-known magic squares.

The Sign of the Hexagram appeared on the Tracing-
Board and is connected with the words 4esh Mazor, whence
it is said to signify the watery-flame or flaming water which
belongs to the Hermetic work. The Sun and Moon typify
the male and female elements, active and passive, corre-
sponding to Jakin and Boaz. But it is affirmed that these
have also their meaning in the operations of Divine Magic,
to which statement is appended an unintelligible sentence,
referring presumably to the Pillars of the Sephirotic Tree,
the Mystery of Mercasa, being the Symbolic Chariot of
Kabalism. The last episode of the Grade was a further
historical recitation, dealing more especially with the
Order of Fratres Lucts and including a sketch of the
Theosophia, Magia and Chemia belonging to the First
Degree.

It seems that according to the ridiculous nomenclature
of the Rite the Mason admitted to the First Degree became
a Knight-Novice of the Third Year and that having been
proved as such for a period of three years he was entitled
to the Second Degree, which is Knight-Novice of the Fifth
Year. It is difficult to believe that such a contradictory
symbolical scheme of times could have obtained in any
sane Ritual, and my inference is that Mrs. Cooper-Oakley,
who was always a confused writer, has mismanaged her

516

-- Page 553 --
Fratres Lucis

material. ‘The ceremonial of the Second Degree is said
to be substantially the same as the first, and it comes about
for this reason that she presents some selections only from
certain addresses delivered in the Chapter. They would
appear to be explanations of Fellow-Craft Symbolism,
though this is little better than speculation in the state
of the summaries given. We hear of the “ entrance ”’—
whether of the Chapter or the Candidate it is impossible
to say—and that it signifies an approaching union of those
principles that are separate in themselves. ‘The letter F,
placed in the centre of a Blazing Star, signifies the active
principle of the Creative Elohim. There is also an allusion
to “the Seven Degrees,” which are not specified by name
and it is impossible therefore to identify the Masonic
Rite: they correspond, however, to the seven metals which
have to be perfected in the Hermetic Work and to the
least number of ‘‘ the true Jewish name of our Matter.”
The following cryptic sentence is appended to this state-
ment: ‘“ Thus Zechariah saw one stone with seven eyes
and finally seven wheels, which are our last workmen, by
means of whom we raise ourselves to perfection.” 1 The
Degrees, moreover, signify seven stars, “ the power of
which is explained in our Kabalistic science, for Natural
Magic is very useful and indeed necessary to our Chiefs
in their work.”

The time of probation for the Third Degree is not
specified, but its title is Knight-Novice of the Seventh
Year, and it is either in analogy with the Craft Master
Grade or the latter is expounded as to its inner meaning
therein. (1) The Temple of Solomon is declared to be the
general synthesis of the Hermetic Art. (2) It is affirmed
to be clear from Ezekiel that Hiram has an universal

1 For the stone with seven eyes see ZECHARIAH ili, 9, but the prophecy has
no reference to wheels. In the Vision of Ezekiel the wheels are four in
number.

517

-- Page 554 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
meaning—namely, Nepuesu, Urim, THumMmMim—and also
that he was slain. (3) He signifies “our Matter, killed by
three workmen in order that they may obtain the Word,”
which Word is Jehovah, otherwise the Central Fire.?
(4) He was buried and the murderers secured his caput
mortuum : it is said to appear “‘ as if the spirit were excited
by rage ” and that the Acacia is an illustration of the fact.
(5) As to the nature of the Matter, this is shewn in the
Master Grade: it comprises three kingdoms, and these are
symbolised in that Grade by (a) the touchstone,* corre-
sponding to the mineral kingdom; (b) the “ dead-head,”
corresponding to the animal; and (c) by the Acacia,
which represents the vegetable kingdom. (6) The Name
or Symbol of Jehovah, which appears in the centre of
a triangle, denotes the fulfilment of the Work, and this
itself is called the Central Fire, otherwise ‘ the greatest
light.” After these explanations, however they may happen
to have been communicated in the course of addresses,
the Candidate is told as follows: ‘ This Matter, Reverend
Brother, is our book, which is here exhibited before thee,
and after close study thou shalt find that it is adorned with
all these qualities.” Mrs. Cooper-Oakley makes tiresome
omissions and at points which seem to be vital, but I con-
ceive it possible that some of them were actuated by a
desire to reserve what she might regard as Masonic

1 There is no reference to Hiram in Ezekiel, whether the king or the
builder and artificer. It is impossible therefore to speculate on the meaning
of this statement. Hiram the worker in brass is mentioned only in 1 Kies,
vii, and 2 Curonictes iv.

2 I conclude that this is an attempt to allegorise in a Hermetic sense for
the purpose of saving the Masonic situation when it communicates familiar
Divine Names and other formule as great secrets protected by solemn
pledges and Words or Names of power.

3 I conclude from this interpretation that German Craft Masonry must
have incorporated stone-symbolism into the Third Degree ; but it may be
mentioned for the benefit of non-Masons that it is not to be found in any
English working, wheresoever practised.

518

-- Page 555 --
Frratres Lucis

Secrets. If the Philosophical Matter of the Fratres
Lucis was literally a book, it is obvious that the work
was not physical—in the sense of metallic transmutation
—and if the qualities which it is said to contain are a
reference to the three kingdoms specified above, then
the latter must be understood in an allegorical or
mystical sense. One is inclined to speculate whether the
Knight-Novice of the Seventh Year had the Bible held up
before him and was told that this was the touchstone—
otherwise a key to all things—a “ dead-head” or caput
mortuum in respect of the cortex or external meaning, and
the Acacia or sign of life and resurrection, a gage of im-
mortality in respect of its inner meaning. As regards the
Third Degree of the Order, I may add that there is one
reference to Hiram, King of Tyre, of whom it is said that
according to the Chaldzan book Jatxor he gained inex-
haustible riches by his wisdom and was eight hundred years
old. But a time came when he thought himself equal with
God, and this led to his destruction. He fashioned two
“beams” by his art and raised seven heavens upon them,
in which he caused an altar to be erected, after the fashion
of the Altar of God. The purpose of this adventure in
emblematic building does not transpire, nor why it was
counted against him as an evil work; but the story says
that God sent Ezekiel to pronounce judgment upon him,
that he fell from the height which he had raised and was
slain subsequently by men.

In the Fourth Degree the Candidate passes from Grades
of supposed Knighthood into offices of priesthood, but as
no one can see why his previous experiences should connect
with the idea of chivalry, so now there is no reason on the
surface, or perhaps beneath it, to account for him becoming
a Levite. ‘There may be, however, an explanation in the
procedure which does not appear in the extracts. A
Catechism contains the following unconnected and mostly

519

-- Page 556 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross ,
inexplicable points. (1) Perfection is 1, 2, 3 and 4, but the
sum of these numbers is 10, and the meaning may be that
perfection is in the keeping of the whole Law: alterna-
tively the allusion may be to the denary scale of the Sephiroth
and the emblematic mystery of their ascent. (2) The Perfect
Flame is that which illuminates, blazes and destroys not.
(3) The word Majim must not be pronounced while proving
pure stones of marble. (4) Elohim is #l: and Kz, the light
without will and the light with will, otherwise colourless
and coloured, will being the source of colour. (5) The
serpent which flies through the air and burns is represented
by the ant found within its scale—referring, I think, to
some rabbinical myth. (6) Moses was forty days with
Schamajim and brought back the natural laws, inscribed
on a stone. Mrs. Oakley says that there are many more
questions and answers, after which the officiating Brother
offers the following Prayer: “I beseech Thee, O Lord, to
grant me two graces, and may they abide with me through
all my life. Take away my idolatry and falsehood ; give
me neither poverty nor riches, but only my daily bread.
Vouchsafe unto me reason and wisdom, that I may learn
both good and evil.” It may be added that the whole
Ceremony is much shorter than those of the previous
Degrees. Considerable stress is laid upon the ethical side
of the Candidate’s life.

In the Fifth Degree and last the Levite becomes a Priest
and is told that he has reached the end of the Secret
Mysteries of a Royal and Sacerdotal Order. It is said also
that he is approaching a barrier, through which he may
pass, if God wills, being “ enlightened by the light.” He
is caused to perform certain ceremonial acts before a
Sacred Fire which has been kindled with religious observ-
ances. Thereafter the Closing is taken. After making
every allowance for a piecemeal translation which may be
also indifferently done, it will be seen that on the surface

520

-- Page 557 --
Fratres Lucts

at least the Candidate has learned little enough throughout
and that there is practically nothing in the Degrees to
deserve calling Ritual. In view of the references to light
Mrs. Oakley cherished an opinion that the teaching of the
Fratres Lucis was designed to lead members from the dark-
ness of sense-life into that illumination of spiritual being
which is our heritage. Her opinion on any subject having
debatable elements cannot be said to count, and there is
nothing apparently in her original to support the view.
The barrier referred to in the Ritual most probably means
the guarded threshold of the Fifth Degree, or alternatively
the threshold of that secret knowledge which would have
been held to lie behind the whole Rite. The intimations
concerning it point to a medley of doctrine in combination
with a medley of occult practices. As such the Order of
Fratres Lucis does not stand alone: there are other Rites
in its likeness, though there is nothing to indicate that they
have drawn therefrom. The characteristic, I am afraid,
of all is that they lead nowhere. The highest Orders
and Degrees of Masonry are shadows of things which have
never passed into plenary expression, but they can open

great vistas of symbolism beyond their own measures :

this is the distinction between them and a thousand others

which were dead before they were born, which contain

nothing and impart nothing in themselves, and have no

windows from which we can look beyond.

Having exhibited the general Ritual-herizon of the
Fratres Lucis, 1 will complete the available information
concerning them by reference to the same source. The
Order was divided into Provinces, particulars of which
are wanting. If the scheme, as it may have been, was laid
out on an elaborate scale, it will be understood that most
of them were in a state of potential subsistence only,
awaiting a day to come when Fratres Lucts would have
acquired the Masonic world. Actually or hypothetically,

521

-- Page 558 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
each Province was governed by a Head elected by the
Brethren over whom he was subsequently to rule. The
Chapter on such occasion was in the hands of a Provincial
Administrator, who sounded a bell seven times. The
process of election began, the votes were taken, the result
was announced in due course and the Head-Elect was
installed immediately after. Psalm ii: ‘‘ Why do the
heathen rage?” was recited, after which the Chancellor-
Assessor and Sword-Bearer uncovered the breast and head
of the elected Knight. ‘The questions of the time were
then put, namely, (1) Whether he promised to have faith
in the Good Author of all creatures to the end of his life ;
(2) whether he would observe the Statutes of the Order
and maintain the same inviolate ; (3) whether he would love
the Brethren more than he loved himself. When the
Assembly had been satisfied on these points, the Chancellor
took a golden cup containing oil and anointed the head of
the Knight-Elect crosswise on the crown, saying: “‘ God
chooses thee as the Chief of His Elect.” Afterwards the
left hand and breast were anointed, with the words:
“ David said unto the Philistines,t etc. He was also and
finally anointed on the right hand, but seemingly with no
verbal formula. He was invested thereafter with the robes
of his Office and with the Cap, the Chancellor saying :
“‘ He who is the Chief Priest among his Brethren, on whose
head has been poured the holy chrism and whose hands
have been anointed, shall be clothed with this sacerdotal
garment, and let him not uncover his head or rend his
robe.” There were other exhortations, ending with this
Prayer: “They who have ears to hear let them hear:
he that overcometh shall have the first Tree of Life [sic]
; 7 The use of the plural notwithstanding it is not unlikely that reference
is intended to 1 Samuet, xviii, 45-47: “Then said David to the Philistine,”
ie. to Goliath. Compare ibid., xxix, 8: “(and David said unto Achish,”
i.e. the King of Gath, who was a Philistine ; but this is without application.
522

-- Page 559 --
Fratres Lucrs

in the Paradise of God. And to the Angel of the Church
[sic, meaning the Church in Smyrna] he shall write:
This is the First and the Last, Who shall die and live
again [sic]. To him that overcometh I will give of the
Hidden Manna, and I will give him a good certificate?
[sic], and this certificate he alone that hath shall know it
[sic]. The lightning shall arise from the Altar, and also
the Thunder and the Voice. And seven lighted candle-
sticks shall be before the Altar which represent the Seven
Spirits of God. May God bless thee and keep thee:
may God teach thee and be gracious unto thee: may God
turn His countenance and give unto thee peace there-
from.””?

As regards the Laws of the Order they may be extracted
thus: (1) The Grades comprised by the Rite, as already
given; (2) Regulations concerning voting, election and
so forth; (3) The decorations of the Temple, in the centre
of which there was to be a seven-branched candlestick of
gold; (4) Offences against the Order and complaints ;
(5) Rules for the preservation of right and order ; (6) The
vestments used in the Rite, but they are omitted by the
translator ; (7) Concerning alms; (8) Dues payable in the
Order ; (9) The Chronology of the Order, and this is
given as follows: The Chronology begins with the year
of the reform which was inaugurated by John the Evan-
gelist, Founder and Head of the Seven Unknown Churches
of Asia, seven years after the death of Christ. By sub-
tracting from a.p. 1781, the year in which the Order was
founded, the 33 years of Christ’s life on earth and the
seven which elapsed before St. John began his work, making
40 years, we arrive at the symbolical or rather mythical
year which was arrogated to itself by the Order, namely,
1741. Were it revived at this day on the same basis it

1 Cf, the “ testimony ” of the previous prayer. «
2 Cf. Ps. iv, 6: “ Lift up the light of Thy countenance upon us.”
523

-- Page 560 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
would assume the age of 1883 years. The subsequent Laws
are devoted to questions of correspondence and business
details.

It remains to be said that the manuscript on which Mrs.
Cooper-Oakley depended was addressed to the Seven Wise
Fathers, Heads of the Seven Churches of Asia, wishing
“‘ peace in the Holy Number ’—presumably the number
seven. The Order comes therefore before us as that of a
Hidden Church or Holy Assembly, ex bypothesi like that
of Eckartshausen, but passing into substituted manifesta-
tion by virtue of its ceremonial workings. The analogy
ends at this point ; but the reference to the Seven Churches
opens a further question. We are taken back to the
Asiatic Brethren or Initiated Brothers of Asia, otherwise
the Knights and Brethren of St. John the Evangelist for
Asia in Europe, which claimed to possess and to propagate
the only true Freemasonry. According to Findel, the
system consisted of two probationary Degrees of seeking
and suffering,! which were followed by (1) Consecrated
Knight and Brother, (2) Wise Master, (3) Royal Priest or
Perfect Rosicrucian, called otherwise the Degree of Mel-
chisedek. It should be understood as regards the last that
it was neither the Eighteenth Degree of the Rite of Perfec-
tion nor any variant thereort but that it drew from the
Golden and Rosy Cross of circa 1777 and from Rosicrucian
things antecedent thereto in Ritual, so far as served its
purpose.? The proof is that the Initiated Brothers of Asia

1 There were three, according to Mrs. Cooper-Oakley, namely, (1)
Seekers, (2) Endurers, (3) Probationers, all classed under the general
denomination of Sufferers. She does not cite her authority. See THEo-
sopHicaL Review, Vol. XXIV, 1899.

2 A Grade of Melchisedek connotes Eucharistic procedure and symbol-
ism, but, according to Findel, Hans Heinrich established a Melchisedek
Lodge at Hamburg into which non-Christians were admitted, as they were
also in Berlin. He promised to unfold the meaning of all Masonic “ hiero-
glyphics,”

524

-- Page 561 --
Fratres Lucis

were almost beyond question a foundation of the Brothers
Ecker und Eckhoffen prior to the Knights of Light. Findel
seems to be the only writer who has thrown any doubt
upon the point, but he has created uncertainty solely by
contradicting himself. He says in one place that Baron
Hans Heinrich was propagator rather than founder and
that he was helped by an Israelite named Hirschmann in
recasting the Rituals; but in another place we are told
that because he had failed in “ obedience, trust and peaceful
behaviour ” he had been expelled from the Rosy Cross
and that in revenge he founded the Asiatic Order. It is
possible that this is a correct version of the matter and it
seems certain also that the only Rituals to remodel were
those of the Rosy Cross.

There is no trace of the Initiated Brothers prior to 1780,
and by Findel’s own shewing the expulsion of Hans Heinrich
could not have taken place till very late in the previous
year, for in 1779 he is said to have been editing for the
Rosicrucians a ‘collection of Masonic [sic] speeches,”
delivered in the “ancient system,” that is, prior to the
Reformation of 1777. But the Fratres Lucis based their
symbolic chronology, as we have seen, on 1781. It is clear
therefore that they arose concurrently with the Initiated
Brothers, or alternatively that they were different branches
or names of one thing. In support of the latter possibility
we find that the heads of the Initiated Brothers claimed to
have been Directors of the Seven Invisible Churches of
Asia, or in other words that they are the very persons to
whom the Wilkoroki manuscript was addressed. Moreover,
the chief stipulation with Candidates was the same in both
cases, or “not to inquire by whom the secrets were com-
municated, whence they came now or might emanate in
the future.” Finally, the Initiated Brothers dated by

1 This is the date of organisation given by Mackey, an American historian
of Masonry. He terms the Asiatic Brothers a Rosicrucian schism,

525

-- Page 562 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

their hypothesis from the year a.p. 40, when the Fratres
Lucis originated under the auspices of St. John the Evan-
gelist. There could be no two emblematical peas more like
unto each other in one pod of the Mysteries. It ought
not to need adding that nothing attaches to the identity
or distinction between the two groups. In modern occult
circles of the theosophical type a considerable rumour of
importance has grown up about the Fratres Lucis, but—
against all intention on her part—it has been dispersed by
the publication of Mrs. Cooper-Oakley’s analysis of the
Warsaw document. ‘The two Orders concern us only as
derivatives of the Rosy Cross in the eighteenth century
under the Masonic egis. ‘They are serviceable as illustrating
the circumstances under which new branches of the Order
or things made in its likeness came suddenly into being,
making great claims on present possession of knowledge
and on an immemorial past, but with very little behind
them and, as it happened in both these cases, with no horizon
in front. According to Clavel, the Initiated Brothers were
in trouble with the police in 1785—-where, however, being
omitted—and in 1787 a writer named Rollig put an end
to them by revealing their secrets. My experience of Secret
Orders, Masonic and otherwise, shews that they do not
suffer death in this manner: more often they undergo
change.

It is reported also that the Fratres Lucis were broken up
in 1795, but the fact is exceedingly doubtful on other
considerations than are adduced by Mrs. Cooper-Oakley.
She refers to a publication entitled Dr SrcNnatsTERN,
and terms it an official organ of the Order. It began to
appear in small volurnes about 1804 and continued for
several years, but was mot a periodical publication in
numbers or in any way corresponding to Transactions. It
is in reality a collection of archives, and according to these
and the general title of the work there were Seven Grades of

526

-- Page 563 --
Fratres Lucis

Mystical Freemasonry, otherwise of the Order of Knights
of Light. I can speak with certainty only of the ninth part
or division, comprised in a duodecimo volume of three
hundred pages and containing (1) a long disquisition on the
Mysteries of Egypt and their alleged analogies with those
of Freemasonry; (2) the Constitution and Laws or
Statutes of the St. John’s Lodge Ferdinand zum Felsen
at the Orient of Hamburg, dated in 1790 and signed by
Hans Karl Freyherr von Ecker und Eckhoffen ; (3) a sheaf
of orations emanating from the Grand Lodge Royal York
of Friendship. If the archives as a whole are to be judged
by these examples, they offer no evidence on the perpetuation
of the Fratres Lucis. I have no doubt that the Astatic
Brethren survived the revelations of Rollig, and I should
regard it as exceedingly doubtful that the concordant or
identical association was actually broken up in 1795. It is
probable that both lapsed gradually and that the second
had passed out of sight at the beginning of the nineteenth
century.

As regards the fraudulent antiquity claimed by both
Orders, it is alleged concerning the Asiatic Brethren (1)
that it underwent some kind of reform in 1541; (2) that
it was working at Prague in 1608; (3) that it was closely
connected with the Rosicrucians and had been helped by
Christian Rosencreutz from time to time—a reference to its
supposed activities, in the early fifteenth century; (4)
that according to one of its traditions it was to continue
till the Head should return—presumably C-.R..C...
The Jew Hirschmann is said to have supplied Kabalistic
and Talmudic elements, including instructions on the four
worlds of Arziluth, Briah, Yetzirah and Assiah. Accord-
ing to Mrs. Oakley the Fratres Lucis were incorporated
originally at Berlin, but were first made public as an Order
at Vienna in 1780, or immediately after the death of the
Empress Maria Theresa. The evidence does not appear,

527

-- Page 564 --
The Brotherhood

and we have seen that their «
year 1781. It appears from
few Rosicrucians were admitt
had fallen away from their or
the thirst for gold and the se

It remains to say that Hi
Eckhoffen—who seems to |
junction with Karl his brotl
bedchamber and counsellor of
According to his own statem
in his sixteenth year and a
after. We have seen that he
Order, or such is the recur
value.

of the Rosy Cross

own chronology points to the
the Warsaw manuscript that
ed, it being alleged that they
iginal ideal, were tainted with
arch after power.

ans Heinrich von Ecker und
ave worked always in con-
1er—was a gentleman of the
the Duke of Coburg-Saalfeld.
ents, he became a Freemason
Rosicrucian at no long date
was expelled from the latter
ring allegation, whatever its

-- Page 565 --
*
CHAPTER XIX
THE ROSY CROSS IN RUSSIA

Accorpinc to one of the legends which have grown up
around the name of Louis Claude de Saint-Martin, that
illustrious French mystic is supposed to have visited Russia
at some uncertain period between the publication of his
work on the correspondence between God, Man and the
Universe! in 1782 and his journey to England in 1787.
It would follow in such case that a Brother of the Rosy
Cross, under the obedience of Martines de Pasqually and
his Rite of Elect Priesthood, had tarried in the Muscovite
Empire. While there is no truth in the story it is certain
that then and subsequently he was abiding there in the
spirit, for at Petrograd and Moscow, if not otherwhere
in Russia, Martinism was the fashion of a period, a philo-
sophical and mystical influence. It was reflected, moreover,
from the illuminations of Drs Erreurs eT DE La VéRITE,
Saint-Martin’s first work and not from the occult Rite of
his teacher Martines de Pasqually. I am about to give
account briefly of the Rosy Cross in Russia, and not un-
fortunately on warrants depending from independent
research of my own.? We shall see that it entered Russia
under the auspices of German adepti who were also Masons,
responsible to a German obedience, and that it worked
hand in hand with the Emblematic Society, more expecially

1 Tasieau Narursi pes Rapports gui existent entre Dieu, PHomme et
PUnivers. Lyon, 1782.

2 [ depend on four articles “ by a Russian ” published in Tue THeEo-
soPHicaL Review, Vols. 38, 39.

2M 529

-- Page 566 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

in its Ecossais developments. We shall see also that
Masonry and the Rosy Cross were known in common par-
lance and were identified, politically speaking, under the
generic name of Martinism. It is a testimony to the
extent of the fashion which I have just mentioned? and
which was illustrated further by a Court farce produced
to ridicule the subject and most probably played under the
eyes of Catherine II? We shall see firstly that it was the
Golden and Rosy Cross of the post-reformation variety
which made its bid for conquest. The emissaries and
chartered Brethren were all indifferently members of the
Strict Osservance, but holding from.Germany, not from
Russia, where the great Rite of Baron von Hund had effected
an entrance so far back as 1765, but had found no soil in
which to take permanent root. The fact of this member-
ship must not be understood as connoting a second effort
to find a place for the OpseRvANCE, which indeed may have
been lingering still within the walls of a few unrecorded
Lodges or Chapters.*

The account of the anonymous Russian, mentioned
in my note, derives in part from Russian MSS. which
are described as “‘ inaccessible for verification by ordinary
readers”? and for the rest on Russian printed books
which have not been translated and are therefore equally

1 The history of Freemasonry in Russia begins circa 1731 and is in the
usual cloud of uncertainty. It has no part in my subject, but it may clear
the issues to say that fifty years later there were several Rites or combinations
of Rites at work.

2 It seems to have permeated all Masonic systems in Russia, as it did in a
number of French Rites and in the German Strict Observance, when the latter
came over to France.

3 It may have been written by the Empress or under her supervision, as a
ien desprit with a motive. On the farce itself and on Martinism in Russia
see the Mémorres of Baronne Henriette Louise d’Oberkirch, first published
at Paris circa 1850 and translated into English in 1852.

“Tt should be understood that the Strict Observance influenced the
Swedish Rite and the Rite of Zinnendorf, both of which played their parts
for a period in Russia.

530

-- Page 567 --
The Rosy Cross in Russia
sealed—except to a very few—in England. It is charac-
terised as an attempt to study “the almost unknown
occult group which worked behind Masonry and in
its midst under the sign and the name of the Rosy Cross ”
—meaning in Russia itself and to some extent in Germany.
There is no doubt in my own mind as to its utter sincerity,1
under circumstances, moreover, when there could be no
ulterior purpose to serve, and as it throws light not only
on its own immediate subject—or on the Rosy Cross in
Russia—but also on the Order in Germany about the period
of the Reformation and thence onward, it is of high and
unquestionable importance. JI must therefore take the
only course which is open and rest satisfied with an analysis
of the several papers into which the account is divided,
adding only such occasional notes as arise out of the text.
Their publication many years ago in a class periodical, which
has been numbered long since with the dead, means that
they have passed out of sight, and I hope that their pre-
sentation here in a readily available form may induce
some competent person to undertake a further investigation
and make the results public.

The central personality of the papers is N. Novikoff,?
of whom it is said that his life-story is that of Freemasonry
and still more of the Rosy Cross in Russia. In the epoch-
making year 1777 we are told that he met Prince Peter
Repinno and was told something of the Order—of the
fact, let us say, of its existence ; but the Prince died before
Novikoff could pursue his inquiries. This notwithstanding
he contrived to proceed further, and we hear of Elaguin,
a Russian noble of French education, who became his
director or chief, but whether in things Masonic or other-
wise is left uncertain.? Elaguin had met with an English-

1 [ have been at the pains of ascertaining the name and character of the
writer, but have no authority to make them public.

2 Otherwise, Novikov.

3 Elaguin or Yelaguin according to the Freemasons’ CaLenpar, 1777,

531

-- Page 568 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

man travelling in Russia and had been assured by him that
“real Masonry was a mysterious science seldom communi-
cated to any one”; that it was passed orally from one to
another in his own country; that the home of the secret
was a very ancient London Lodge, the existence of which
was known to but few Brethren; and that it was difficult
to gain admission therein. It must be said that this looks
like mendacity, but the story goes on to affirm that the
unnamed and perhaps anonymous Englishman gave
Elaguin five years in which to make acquaintance with
wisdom and that the Russian became a student, the lines
followed in his adventure not being otherwise specified,
till the time came when he received as his teacher and friend,
a certain Dr. Stanislas Ely, author of a work entitled
Brotuerty Apvice and said to have been well known at
the period. He is affirmed further to have been a Kabalist,
and under his auspices Elaguin began the study of Robert
Fludd—among other writers. Whether he continued and
how he fared the deposition does not tell us, for Ely passes
out of sight as well as the other mysterious Englishman,
and when we next encounter the pupil he is in the position
of master and leader. We hear of a “ vast library ” belong-
ing to Lodges under his system and of MSS. in his own
collection. ‘The latter included an alleged translation from
Eugenius Philalethes under the title of A Worp on Berne,
which seems to have contained a Diagram of the Tree
of Life in Kabalism, shewing the allocation of planets
to Sephiroth, ‘worked out in a most interesting way.”*
was appointed Provincial Grand Master of Russia by the Grand Lodge of
England in 1772. He was a Court official and a favourite of the Empress.

1 Though he speaks in one place of Ten Secret Principles, which suggest
the Ten Sephiroth, it must be said that there is no reference to the Tree of
Life in Kabalism anywhere in the writings of Eugenius Philalethes, and
much less a Diagram of the Tree. As it would be intolerable to suppose that
a Russian student had access to an unprinted and utterly unknown text, !
conclude that there is some mistake in the attribution.

532

-- Page 569 --
The Rosy Cross in Russia
There were notes also written by Elaguin himself, in which
he quoted from the Mysreries or CurisTIANiTY, also
translated from the English and said to have been printed
at London in 1775.

As regards the “vast library,” two of its items—pre-
sumably both in MS.—were a Turosopuicat-Macicat-
Kazauistic Expranation, by Wéllner, the so-called evil
genius of Frederick William IT, and the anonymous Diary
of a German Mason. It emerges from the latter document
(1) that the author had visited Russia to help the Masonic
Brethren in that country; (2) that he returned to Berlin;
(3) that in Berlin he assisted at studies of the Rosy Cross
Degree [sic]; (4) that at one of the Rosicrucian conven-
tions a member named Simson reported having heard
that true Masonry was to come once more from the
Kingdom of Tibet; but (5) that another named Ritch
had been told of its expected advent from Eastern Russia.
The date of this second MS. was 1784.

It does not transpire after what manner Elaguin pro-
moted the aspirations of Novikoff, who came next under the
influence of John George Schwarz, described as born
on Slav soil in Transylvania. Being one of two Russian
deputies at the Masonic Convention of Wilhelmsbad in
1782, it is said that at those epoch-making deliberations,
when the Rite of the Strict Observance was weighed in
the balance, he met with persons who “ hid from the other
Masons.” They were in fact Rosicrucians but distin-
guished apparently by a different policy than was followed
by Baron Ecker und Eckhoffen at the same time in the same

1 The German Rosicrucians at Wilhelmsbad do not figure as such in the
history of the Masonic Congress, and it is more likely that they were absent
than moving mysteriously about as people hiding from observation. They
were Masons as well as Rosicrucians and could mix with other Masons as
such. It is on record that Baron Hans Heinrich von Ecker und Eckhoffen
was engaged actively in the precincts of the Congress conferring his Grade
called True Rosicrucian, being part of the system known as Asiatic Brethren.

533

-- Page 570 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
place. However this may be, they found no difficulty in
advising Professor Schwarz that ‘ the hour to bless Russia
had arrived ” or to entrust him with papers for the organisa-
tion of the Rosy Cross therein, namely, the First or Theo--
retical Degree of Solomon’s Science.t Their facility is
explained by the fact that Schwarz had been received
previously into the Order at Berlin, by no less an adept
than Wéollner. He was now constituted Chief of the
Theoretical Degree for Russia, and as far as it is possible
to reach an intelligible mean amidst the confusion of the
various statements, it is clear that a warrant was conveyed
also to Novikoff, who by this time was already a member
of the Masonic Strict Observance. Rules of Procedure
were established in writing to the following effect: (1)
That the qualification of Rosicrucian Candidates should be
the rank of Ancient Scottish Master? ; (2) That no copies
were to be taken of any documents ; (3) That the teachings
peculiar to the Degree should be communicated once in
every nine Meetings—meaning, I presume, that the rest
were to be concerned with ceremonial ; (4) That Schwarz
was to explain and interpret on his own authority in the
best manner that he could; (5) That there was to be abso-
lute secrecy, with prudent choice of members ; (6) That
Novikoff was to be admitted, having bound himself in the
presence of at least three Theoretical Brethren to recognise
Schwarz as his head ; (7) That he was not to receive anyone
without the permission of Schwarz; (8) That other
Russian Wardens were to obey Novikoff. The document

1 There is certainly a confusion here, presumably on the part of the
anonymous Russian. We have seen that Zelator was the first Grade of the
Golden and Rosy Cross.

2 On the multitude of Ecossais Grades see my New Encyctoppia oF
Freemasonry, I, 208-13. The particular variety which we know to have
existed in Russia at the Novikoff period was called Scottish Master. There is
no need to say that all Ecossais Grades, like all Masonic Rites everywhere,
were ancient by their hypothesis or that this hypothesis is false.

534

-- Page 572 --
The Rosy Cross in Russia

which embodied these undertakings is described as “ given ”
in the Palace of the Theoretical Degree at Berlin on
October Ist, 1781, and was executed by Johann Christian,
Eques a Tarda, and Franciscus Wilhelmus, Eques a Castra.
It is to be observed that these titles of symbolical chivalry
‘shewed that the signatories belonged to the Strict Observ-
ance. Their use in place of Sacramental Names signifying
Rosicrucian initiation serves to indicate that the two Orders
were working at that time under some kind of concordat.
It corresponded probably to a later arrangement, in virtue
of which my own Warrant as a member of the great
spiritual chivalry is countersigned by the Supreme Council
of the Thirty-third Degree in the particular jurisdiction
concerned.

It is said that in virtue of his appointment Schwarz
returned to Russia, bearing a new and unheard of teaching
—so far as that country was concerned. ‘he objects were
(1) to seek the Great Mystery of Perfection ; (z) to attain
therein all heights accessible to man; (3) to found a new
Church which should unify all nations and make peace
between all governments.! It is affirmed by the anonymous
writer that spiritual life in Russia “rose to unknown
heights ” when Moscow took its place as the heart of the
“new teaching.” Having discounted this extravagance
of language as that of an enthusiasm which betrays its
own folly, we shall find some food for reflection in the
political aspects of the third clause, and may feel disposed
to recognise that the German Rosy Cross had profited by
intention at least from the astuteness of Wdllner; that it
had a programme to develop in Russia; and that when
Catherine of Russia intervened, as she did presently, it

1 The point is notable, when we remember Fama Fraternitatis and its
profession of the faith maintained at that time in Germany and other
reformed countries. But we shall see that out of the Rosy Cross in Russia
there was produced the idea of an Interior Church as conceived by the
mystic Lopukhin.

535

-- Page 573 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

may be that her action was not apart from knowledge.
On the other hand, if we can forget Wollner, it might seem
possible that within the measures of the three clauses
there lay expressed rather than concealed a “ glorious
great intent ” belonging to a policy of God, in which case
Catherine might have known something, but it was
enough to miss the meaning. It would seem mean-
while that Professor Schwarz and his coadjutor went
to work in real earnest, for we hear of Rosicrucian
Lodges or Temples established at Moscow, Petrograd,
Orel, Simbirsk, Mohileff, Vologda and in the ancient city
of Yaroslav.

As tegards the teaching of the Order, its elementary
part, or that of the Lower Degrees, recalls the little that
we know of things communicated within the circle of the
Golden and Rosy Cross, post 1777. There was instruction
on the elements in general, or Fire, Air, Water and Earth ;
on things of the body and on spirits ; on Sulphur, Mercury
and Salt; on the sperm of all things; on Birth, Death
and Resurrection; on the action of Superior Stars; on
the generation of metals, on metals and precious stones ;
on plants and the animal kingdom; on maladies of the
human body, mental maladies and those of the soul;
and on the perfect state of all things. But there were
instructions also on God and Nature, on chaos, on the
duties of those admitted to the Inner Temple of the
Sciences of Solomon, with extracts from Béhme and other
“ God-taught ” men. We are told also of a printing-press
attached to the Degree and of works issued therefrom,
such as the Rinc or Prato and Simpie InsTructions on
Prayer. The latter spoke of preparing the heart by inner
meditation to realise that Christ, like the old Adam, is
within us and not without. ‘The Theoretical Degree
was called a Rosicrucian School of Nature’s Mysteries,
for the education of members in love of God and their

536

-- Page 574 --
The Rosy Cross in Russia
Brethren and for the encouragement of the work of
charity.

The Kabalah, Magic and practical Alchemy were
studied in the Higher Degrees, the Russian writer speculat-
ing whether the last was to be understood spiritually.
The same question might be raised about all three branches,
when we learn that the mystic Lopukhin belonged to the
Order, and it is on record that according to him its true
mark or seal was that love in which the inner body grows
up. His work on the [nrer1or CuurcH! appeared at
Petrograd in 1798, issuing—as I have suggested in a recent
note—from within the secret circle. The speculation
sheds strange light on the possible purpose of the Rosy
Cross in Russia. According to its own claims, it taught
Divine Wisdom, Chemistry as known to science, but also
a Divine Chemistry, said to be “ unrivalled in its dis-
coveries.” That, I take it, was a chemistry of the soul, the
transmutation of soul by the Divine Spirit, or there may be
a key in the observation of Lopukhin, just quoted, on the
growth of the inner body. The reference is to the radiant
body of adeptship, about which we have seen that there
are intimations in the writings of Thomas Vaughan.?

There are vestiges, however, of more direct mystical
instruction, as for example in certain intimations concerning

1 See Some CwaracTeristics oF THE InrerIoR Cuurcu, by I. V.;
Lopukhin, translated by D. H. 8. Nicholson and introduced by myself. 1912.
Mr. Nicholson was unacquainted with the fact that the reference to
“* Novikoff’s Society ” in his preface was a reference to the Rosy Cross, as he
had not met with the Russian’s contributions to Tue THEosopuica Review.
It may be added that at the time of my collaboration I was in the same
position.

2 See my Introduction to Tue Works or THomas Vaucuan, pp. xxxi-
xxxv. There are allusions also in Some Cuaracreristics. Lopukhin
speaks of love as “the true sign of regeneration in Jesus Christ,” adding
that it is the soul of the regenerated interior body and that “this soul is
manifested in proportion as the body grows.”—Chapter IV. Elsewhere
he says that it is the body of Jesus Christ which must be “reborn in us.”—
Chapter V.

537

-- Page 575 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

a “supernatural state,” so-called. The affirmation is
that those who attain it are recipients of great mercies
and exceptional gifts from God. “It is not possible to
express the outpouring of love and beatitude which flows
down upon them.... They become sensible of Christ
and find union with Him and with the Holy Spirit... .
They receive God and His peace.” It is said also that in
their liberation from the animal creature they forget—
as it were—their embodiment and the sense of self is not
with them. ‘They are transfigured into Christ; they
are as one spirit with Him, annihilated in God, even in
the depth of F's being. . . ..Henceforth their life on
earth is a progress towards Heaven only.”! There is some
advice as to the means of reaching this state. Supposing
that the record is one of aspiration towards attainment
rather than a memorial thereof, it remains of great import-
ance as to object and intention. It is expressed, however,
in the terms of experience and may be compared with the
substance of another memorial, which affirms that Christ,
operating through faith, brings us to birth as Sons of
Light. “In such light we communicate with Father and
with Son, as well as with each other.”? The Son mani-
fested within us by the Father is described as ‘ the source of
water flowing into the eternal womb.” ‘There is also the
following invocation. ‘ Brethren, we call you into the
holy union, into the communion with Holy Ones who are
inthe true light . . ., the Fire-Ring of Loving Intelligence.”
The hearers of this address were reminded that the life

1 A more direct teaching of the purely mystical kind than is met with in—
I think—any other published memorial of the Rosy Cross.

® There are similar intimations in Lopukhin’s Some CHaracreRisTIcs.
Compare also the hints scattered here and there through the strange account
of a Hidden Temple in the Partapetpuian T'ransactions. I should add
that the MS. quoted in my text is or was preserved in the Petrograd Imperial
Library, MSS. Section, O, III, 63. It is described as Masonic, but belongs
obviously to the archives of the Rosy Cross.

538

-- Page 576 --
The Rosy Cross in Russia
of sense is temporal and comparable as such to the strings
of a lute, “‘which vibrate only so long as the hand strikes.”
It would seem therefore that the adepti if not the initiators
of the Rosy Cross in Russia were “ mystic citizens of the
eternal kingdom,” whether or not their charter was signed
by the crafty and time-serving Wollner.

I proceed now to the Rite itself in its working, so far as
the information in the memorial can be harmonised and
drawn together. The headquarters—otherwise the Directory
of the Order—were located at Moscow, presumably in
a Lodge called Eparchy, which represented an union of all
circles of the Rosy Cross in Russia. The question of
headship is not a little complicated according to the piece-
meal accounts. It appears that Schwarz died in 1784 at
the age of thirty-three years... The leadership of the
Theoretical Degree was then assumed by a Directory,
which was responsible to Wo6llner and another
German Rosicrucian, named Theden, who is not more
particularly described. IJ learn from independent sources
that he was a surgeon at Berlin, of whom it is said
that he “tried to catch falling stars, believing that from
their substance might be distilled the prima materia, a
tincture for universal use.”? In any case he was one of
the secret heads who had charge of the Russian branch
represented by Schwarz, when alive, at Moscow and at
Berlin by Wollner. The Directory was apparently con-
stituted on April 30, 1784, “by order of the High

1 He is said to have been buried in a church in Otchakov, close to the
altar. He affirmed on his death-bed that he had been judged and found
without guilt, wherefore he asked those about him to take part in his glad-
ness. Only a very high state of attainment could warrant such a conviction !
It is said that in 1820 a meeting was held at Moscow to commemorate
his services. The expressed sentiment was that the teacher was still present
in the grace of his influence.

2 See Gilbert Stanhope: A Mystic on THE Prusstan THRONE, 1912,
p- 128.

539

-- Page 577 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
Teachers.” The three chosen leaders gave each other
their hands and swore loyalty to the Order, “ having
prayed on their knees to the T'riune God.” Their names
in full, with their chivalrous denominations in the Strict
Observance were: (1) Nicolai Novikoff, Egues ab Ancora ;
(2) Prince Nicolai Troubetzkoi, Eques ab Aquila Boreali ;
(3) Pierre Taticheff, Eques a Signo Triumphante. ‘The
secret name of Novikoff in the Rosicrucian Order was
Colomir. It would seem that when the Charter was issued
he was admitted at once into the highest Degrees. It is
impossible to adjust dates, and they are few and far between
in the narrative, but there was a time subsequently when
the famous Baron Schrdéder! was Wéllner’s delegate for
Moscow, and he would seem to have acquired a position
at the head of the whole movement. The fact is challenged,
however, by the Russian writer on considerations which
are open to criticism, if anything attached to the
question.

As regards the Laws or Statutes by which the Directory
governed its members, they emerge only here and there,
and may be grouped in the following order: (1) Unques-

1 The reference is to Baron F. J. W. Schréder, 1733-92, whom Masonic
writers connect with a Rectified Rose-Croix, possibly an occult version of the
Eighteenth Degree, possibly another attempted reformation of the German
Rosy Cross. He was concerned with Alchemy and Magic. But in all
probability it is a confused reference to his connection with the Order of
1777. Baron F, L. Schréder, his brother, was Provincial Grand Master of the
Provincial Grand Lodge of Lower Saxony at Hamburg. See my New
EncycLtop#via oF Freemasonry, II, 28. As regards the delegate of
Willner, the anonymous Russian tells us (1) that a time came when he fell
deeply ; (2) that he was led astray by many temptations ; (3) that Novikoft
thwarted his financial schemes ; (4) that Schréder seems to have attempted
reprisals ; (5) that Koutouzoff, a high Mason and pupil of Wéllner at Berlin,
warned the Russian Rosicrucians to suspend relations with the former
delegate, who ultimately left Russia; (6) that Catherine received news of
his death in 1792, when Novikoff was in prison ; and (7) that he admitted
in his will having deceived the Rosicrucians of Moscow, but in what manner
or to what extent does not appear in the story.

540

-- Page 578 --
The Rosy Cross in Russia

tioning obedience was due.to the Head of the Order, apart
from knowledge concerning him and without asking who
he was.!_ (2) Candidates must be approved by the Directory
prior to their reception, even the Warden-in-Chief of
Petrograd submitting names to Moscow. (3) The existence
of the Directory was kept secret from members of lower
Grades. (4) The Masonic qualification of Candidates
obtained throughout.2 There were also rules which
governed the Theoretical Degree, and these are given
seriatim. (1) Receptions were in the hands of the Warden,
from which it would seem to follow that there was no
Master of the Lodge.’ (2) Before going on leave it was
his duty to provide a substitute, pledged to return all
papers on demand and to copy none. (3) He was required
further to make provisions for the records in case of death.
(4) Instructions in the Theoretical Degree were to be read
and explained according to the best lights of the Warden.
(5) A record was to be kept by the Secretary of everything
said and done. (6) At Meetings apart from receptions
the Brethren were to take their seats at a table for study,
same being covered with a black cloth and having a seven-
branched candlestick in the centre. (7) Meetings were to
be held monthly. (8) It was laid down that every “ pupil ”
—meaning Candidate—must belong to some branch of
the Christian Religion, discharging his duties as such with
zeal and earnestness, but shewing tolerance towards all
forms of sincere belief.

1 Jt will be remembered that a similar stipulation was made by the
Asiatic Brethren and may have arisen from the bitter lesson taught by the
experience of the Strict Observance, which foundered on the rock of its
claim concerning Unknown Superiors.

2 It follows that there were no Women of the Rosy Cross in Russia.
Compare the Rituals of 1777 as regards the Masonic qualification,

3 "The distinction is idle, for the information available does not acquaint
us with the Russian term which is rendered as Warden.

541

-- Page 579 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

The Degrees incorporated by the Rite are set out in
a schedule as follows :
THE ROSY CROSS
Degrees Magical Titles Number of
Progression Members

I 9 Magi 7

2 8 Masters 77

3 7 Adepts 777

(Probationers)

4 6 Majores 788

5 5 Minores 779

6 4 Philosophi 822

7 3 Practici 833

8 2 Theoretici 844

9 I Juniores 929

5856
This is the Ritual succession as established by Magister
Pianco in Tue Rosicructan Unvertep and as verified by
the various Rituals of the reformation epoch, but it is
muddled in respect of the Adept Grades. It will be seen
that the Grade number added to its corresponding magical
progression always produces the denary, which is therefore
the suggested number of the system, but the Grades are
nine. There is another Rosicrucian Grade - succession
which always suggests eleven but the attained number is
ten. As regards the number of members, it seems to me
that some items have miscarried in transcription: they
differ in any case from those of the German Rosy Cross.
By the hypothesis of the symbolism the grace and power
of the Order proceeded downward from unity, whereas the
Candidate proceeded from unity upward. The Theoretical
Degree, of which we hear so much in the memorials, was
therefore second in the scheme, and we only learn vaguely of
any other being worked in Russia. The first, or that of
Juniores, is never mentioned. It is said that in the Fifth

542

-- Page 580 --
The Rosy Cross in Russia

Degree the Candidate partook of Wine and Bread, as in the
Holy Eucharist ; that he was anointed and clothed in a kind
of priestly garb; and that he received a name and crest.
Of those in the Sixth Degree we are told that they were
on the level of angels and that thence upward the whole
life was consecrated, as in official religion, meaning life
under conventual rule and observing a rule of silence—
at least as far as possible. If this is to be understood
literally and as obtaining throughout the Order, it is certain
that Bischofiswerder and W6llner carried great dispensa-
tions. It seems clear otherwise that there were advance-
ments up to a certain point, for we hear that the conditions
were humility, modesty and love of Brethren. Moreover,
each member of the “‘ Assembly ” was required to be loyal
towards the Government, obedient to Superiors, peace-
loving as a citizen and an apostle of peace in strife. The
reference is to the Theoretical Degree, which appears
from the beginning of the account as of great importance
in the system: we are told of “that splendid group of
high minds, of high souls who bore the humble title.”

A writer named Parowky is reported as stating that
a terrible pledge was given by every Rosicrucian—namely,
to die rather than reveal the Rosy Cross, even under torture.
That of the Theoretical Degree was, however, short and
simple: “I, N..N.., testifying in complete freedom and
after due deliberation, do promise hereby (1) to worship
the Eternal, Omnipotent Jehovah through all my days ;
(2) so far as in me lies, to become acquainted with His
wisdom and omnipotence by the study of Nature; (3) to
renounce the vanities of this world; (4) to promote

1 We have seen that above the Grade of Adeptus Minor there are
practically no particulars of procedure in the Golden and Rosy Cross. We
can make no inference therefore as to what was required of Members o-
what was implied by the Mastery of the Eighth Grade. Novikoff is suppose 1
to have enjoyed the freedom of the whole Rite, but so far from leading a
conventual life, he was a husband and father.

543

-- Page 581 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
whatsoever is profitable for my Brethren, to love them in
word and deed and serve them in all their needs; (5) to
observe unbroken silence, as God is true and eternal.”
There are no particulars of the Ceremony, but it required
three apartments and a vestibule or place of preparation.
The inscription over the first door was Know THyseELr,
over the second Fry Evin and over the third Szex Goop.!
There was work about an Altar.

The following additional points may be drawn thus
together: (1) The Order was affirmed to come from the
East—meaning Palestine—and to have been brought
into Scotland by ten Brothers, who are said also to have
restored it It should be observed that this is a variant
of the Stricc Observance legend, according to which the
Knights Templar were preserved and perpetuated by
Aumont, the Prior of Auvergne. (z) The connection
between the Rosy Cross and Masonry was very close at
the time in Russia ; the Masonic membership was no doubt
comparatively small and the government in a few hands ;
the important personalities probably belonged to both.
(3) The Directory at Moscow seems to have exercised
jurisdiction over the Johannite or Craft Degrees and
Ecossais Masonry. (4) The name of Martinism covered
both activities in the profane or popular world—as we have
seen. (5) According to M. V. Longuinoff, one of the bio-
graphers of Novikoff, the Chief of the Ninth or Highest
Rosicrucian Degree was one of the Seven Magi, or Magus
Major, but we know that Magus was the title of every
member in this exalted position. It is said of one of them
that he was born in Venice and lived in Egypt; but this

1 It is conceivable that counsels like these which to us are commonplaces
of spiritual life may have signified differently and even perhaps deeply when
they were set up in Russia accompanied by great claims. ‘There seems no
question that Martinism, Masonry and the Rosy Cross came with glad
tidings to Petrograd and Moscow, like a spirit of life breathing on bones of
tormalism, speaking of liberation and light dawning in the heart.

544

-- Page 582 --
The Rosy Cross in Russia

is doubtless to be understood symbolically, there being
various emblematical or mythical locations for the different
Degrees. The name ascribed to the personality in question
is Lucianus Rinaldus de Perfectis, but this is a mystical
title belonging to the Ninth Degree. The nine Chiefs
are represented as living in Cyprus, Palestine, Mexico,
Italy, Persia, Germany, India and England, but according
to Magister Pianco they were to be found in Egypt, Persia,
Venice, Madrid, London, Amsterdam and Cologne. None
of the ascriptions can be taken literally. Tue Rosicructan
Unveitep tells us that it is explained orally why they are
scattered through the world.t Other allocations, which are
many, stand at the same value and are explicable in the
same manner.

Such is the story of the Rosy Cross in Russia, the only
country in which it was enabled to illustrate the thesis that
it was fons et origo of ancient Freemasonry by having
Masonry under its wing.? There was, however, a Nemesis on
the threshold. On April 21, 1792, the Empress Catherine II
issued an ukase for the arrest of Novikoff. We are told
that Lopukhin and Tourgureff burned their papers at
night, as also Prince Troubetzkoi—the latter at his country
seat. There is no need to say that the central book-
collection was also seized. The accused himself is described
as almost in a dying state when the blow fell, but his young
nephews are supposed to have carried off the “ dangerous ”
secret documents, and very few things were found. It
could not have been an unexpected blow, for Novikoff had
been examined previously—though only as to the Christian

1 Magister Pianco’s entire scheme of Rosicrucian Grades, their titles,
symbols, sacramental names and places of distribution will be found in my
SecreT TRADITION tN Freemasonry. See the folding diagram facing p. 218
of the second volume, to which I have referred on p. 456.

2 The reference is perhaps more especially to Johannite and Fcossais
Grades, but it would include the Strict Observance, supposing that this was
at work.

2N 545

-- Page 583 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

Creed and his position respecting it—by the Metropolitan
Archbishop Platon, who told Catherine in writing that “ he
wished there might be, all the world over, such Christians
as Novikoff.” The process began and was directed nominally
against the Martinists, but we are told that it was not
formal and that no judgment was passed. Certain people
were banished to their country estates after written
examinations and were threatened in the event of their
leaving them or inducing others to join “ the evil sect.”
The German Lodges are said to have continued undisturbed:
in a word, according to the anonymous Russian, everything
proves that the Empress feared Novikoff alone. We learn
also the reason. It is said that ‘‘ Catherine songht to dis-
cover the measure of her heir’s engagements to Masonry,
and the test question to Novikoff was therefore: “ What
were your relations with a certain person of high rank?”
That person was the Grand Duke Paul, afterwards Paul I.
The desired information was not obtained, and on May
17 or 18 Novikoff was taken secretly to “‘ the living tomb ”
of the Schliisselburg Fortress, being condemned to fifteen
years’ imprisonment, though the sentence was not signed by
the Empress till August 8. His fate was shared voluntarily
by his doctor—Michail Bagriansky—and by his valet.
Those who are concerned must be referred to my original
for the story of this imprisonment, and of things connected
therewith and arising therefrom. It ended on November 6,
1796, with the death of Catherine and the succession of
Paul I, who threw open the doors of the prison. That the
new Emperor was indeed a Mason, if not also a member of
the Rosy Cross, there is perhaps no need to say. His

roposition was therefore one of full liberty for the Masonic
Lodges and their work. It is suggested that he might
even have taken the Office of Grand Master, but there
were other interests at work. He became instead Grand
Master of the Order of Malta, and to Masonry he was lost.

546

-- Page 584 --
The Rosy Cross in Russia

The story of the Rosy Cross in Russia ends at this point,
so far as my records are concerned, but the life of Novikoff
continued till July 31, 1818, when “ he passed away peace-
fully ” in his seventy-fourth year. He had seen an interdict
laid on all Masonry in 1797 by his Imperial Liberator. He
had seen the ban removed in part and in brief—or so the
story goes—by the Czar Alexander. We know that sup-
pressions of this kind do not kill institutions which have
anything vital in them: they disappear from public gaze
and find a place in catacombs or in the very crypts. of
palaces. After the greater light on the further side of
mortality had Sawned upon the soul of Novikoff, or in
1822, there followed a more rigid and much more prolonged
interdict on all the Secret Rites ; but there can be no one so
unwary as to say that from the year mentioned and onward
to 1916 there was no Masonry at work in Russia. And in
whatsoever places of hiddenness there was also and remained
the Russian Rosy Cross. I have had reports concerning it
by word of mouth, testifying to a time when it reposed in
the bosom, so to speak, of certain families, as if it were a
family tradition, a skeleton in the cupboard of certain
noble houses, a secret abiding under their armorial bearings.
I have had reports of it later still, also by word of mouth,
and according to these some branch or phase or remnant was
subsisting under a rose of many petals in Petrograd, prior
to the War. In both cases, so far as I am justified in
surmising, it had degenerated once again into the occult
activities of old, presumably the so-called astral workings.
It is highly probable that it had outlived all interest and all
consequence, but in some sense or other it remained and
may rise again out of its ashes when the present reign of
terror is over."

1 There are said to be Rosicrucian documents in the Petrograd Library
and in the Roumianzeff Museum at Moscow, which contains also various
letters of Novikoff.

547

-- Page 585 --
CHAPTER XX
ENGLISH ROSICRUCIANISM OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY
So far as this work has proceeded the Woman of the Rosy
Cross has scarcely been met with therein. The possibilities
of her membership, her qualifications, if any, have not
emerged for consideration. It would appear as if they had
not so much as occurred to the mind of the original
Brotherhood, though the Lady Lucifera and her trains of
radiant virgins were persona of manifold importance in the
dramatic pageant of the Curmicat Nuptiatrs, and though
it follows from the Laws of 1710 that a Brother in wedlock
could work on alchemy with his wife. When the Golden
and Rosy Cross laid out a private plan to take all Masonry for
its province, providing Unknown Superiors as inscrutable
as those of the Strict Observance, its rule of Masonic
qualification would have put up a barrier to the initiation
of both sexes, supposing that such a question arose, but
there is not the least evidence or indeed likelihood that it
did. On antecedent and a priori considerations there was
something to be said against the exclusion of women from
the peculiar mysteries of the Order, for in the traditional
history of alchemy—not to speak of the fraudulent
ascriptions of certain texts—there was Miriam the sister
of Moses and there was Mary the Egyptian, both of whom
had attained the Grade of Adeptship. We are now brought
into touch with another method of procedure, appealing
also to tradition, and with presumably another branch of
the Rosicrucian Mystery, emerging not unfitly from a past
548

-- Page 586 --
English Rosicructanism

which gives up no clue as to its genesis, connections or
history. On September 12 in the year 1794 a certain
Comte de Chazal, then resident or sojourning in the district
of Pampelavuso, Isle of Mauritius, received Dr. Sigismund
Bacstrom, who is known otherwise to Hermetic students,
into a Soctetas Rosee Crucis, personally and on the spot,
by what is known as the mode of communication. The
record of this admission remains in the form of an under-
taking or certificate, signed by the neophyte and counter-
signed by his initiator over the seal of the Society. It is
a remarkable document from several points of view, and
I proceed to summarise its contents with reasonable fullness,
under the following heads.

On the historical side of the subject, it affirms (1) that
the Society is most ancient, most learned and comprises
investigators of Divine, Spiritual and Natural Truth;
(2) that in the year 1490 it.separated from the Freemasons ;
(3) that it reunited subsequently and formed one spirit with
the Masonic Brotherhood; (4) that at this time the Society
assumed the denomination of Fraires Rosee Crucis. These
statements are substantially identical with those of Magister
Pianco, in Tue Rosicructan UNVEILED, concerning the
Magical Brethren. At the end of the eighteenth century
they seem to have obtained a kind of traditional value by
repetition from mouth to mouth. The fact that they were
countenanced and advanced by and under the authority of
some given branch of the Rosicrucian Order offers no
evidence that they were in vogue prior to the first printed
work in which they were presented, nor does it signify that
the branch in question was producing an intentionally
fraudulent history. It was an utterly uncritical period, so
far as occultism and its personalities were concerned, and
it seems possible that people, otherwise of sincere minds,
invented traditional histories because certain things seemed
explicable along such lines, especially in regard to supposed

549

-- Page 587 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
Secret Tradition and the mode of its transmission through
centuries. "They expressed them in terms of certitude,
because they came to believe in them on their own part,
amidst all their contradictions and notwithstanding all
unlikelihood.

It follows otherwise from the document (1) that the
Society was concerned solely and only with the work of
physical alchemy ; (2) that it pretended to the possession
of secret knowledge on this subject ; (3) that it pledged its
members not only to keep its secrets sacred but any dis-
coveries of their own connected therewith ; (4) that those
who entered the Order undertook to make a beginning
in the Great Work as soon after as circumstances, health,
opportunity and time permitted; (5) that .t:is beginning
was to be made with their own hands and was not therefore
to be deputed ; (6) that every individual discovery relating
to the Great Work must be communicated to that Brother
who was nearest at hand; (7) that if it should please God
to permit of the Great Work being accomplished by a
member with his own hands, the same should give thanks
to God, should do and promote all possible good to others
and be dedicated himself to the pursuit of true and useful
knowledge ; (8) that it was most especially forbidden to
administer Aurum Potabile to any person infected with
venereal disease ; and (g) that every member was pledged
on his admission never to give the Fermented Metallic
Medicine for transmutation—not even a single grain—to
any person unless that person was an initiated and received
Brother of the Rosy Cross.

It will be seen that this branch of the Order, like the
Golden and Rosy Cross of 1777, gave certain instructions
to its members, who were left to work them out; if they
came to any good by so doing, the Society was to share in the
result ; if they failed, on the other hand, there was no
undertaking on the part of the Society to instruct them

55°

-- Page 588 --
English Rosicrucitanism

further or to extricate them from any difficulties conse-
quent on the cost of experiment. In this case, as in two
others that have preceded, my conclusion is that the Society
existed to exploit the wits and industry of the rank and file
of Brethren, hoping that in this manner the Great Work
might be in fine accomplished within the secret circle and
redound to its everlasting credit.1 The occult fool is still
extant, however, and I may as well register briefly his
inevitable counterview. He will believe that all these
branches of the Rosy Cross had true Masters ruling in the
inmost circle ; that they were in possession of the Metallic
Medicine and the Elixir Vite ; but at the same time and
rightly they promised nothing to their neophytes but that
which might result from their own industry, guided, how-
ever, from above. ‘This reservation notwithstanding, in the
case of a properly prepared and truly deserving novice,
discovered to be such by the unerring illumination of the
Masters, these latter in their perfect compassion did so guide
their elect children, so lead them from point to point of in-
struction, that at a right and proper time the mastery was
in fine attained by them. My answer is: Quod erat
demonstrandum demonstratum non est. In other words, the
evidence for this view is in the folly of the belief which
prompts it, for other witness there is none. I might as
reasonably advance on my own part that the Golden and
Rosy Cross, and the particular Societas now under con-
sideration were secret political centres—working, e.g. for
universal revolution—and that they derived their revenues
from the subscriptions of Hermetic enthusiasts, whom they
led to expect great things without actually promising
them. There is again no evidence and antecedently in both

1 It is obvious that the personal claims of Comte de Chazal are opposed
to this view, but there is no evidence that, however genuinely held, they
represented truth in fact. The best comment upon them is that the Count
received his income from Bordeaux, as we shall see.

551

-- Page 589 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

cases there is no likelihood. My own hypothesis of quest is in
harmony with the facts on record, as also with the prob-
ability of things, while it saves the several associations from
that charge of flagrant imposture which would be the re-
source of extreme criticism. An intimate study of the
documents leads me to conclude that there is something
which calls to be saved from aspersions of this kind, for
however unconvincing they are in various and several
respects, it is impossible not to recognise a heart of sincerity
at their root. This is eminently the case with the Rituals
of 1777, but it is the case also with the Bacstrom Certificate,
countersigned by de Chazal.

The position of the association in respect of official
religion and political matters is indicated —, the following
undertakings on the part of Novices: (1) That they would
not build churches, chapels or hospitals; (2) That they
would not establish public charities, there being already
a sufficient number of such institutions, if only they were
regulated efficiently ; (3) That they would provide no salary
for a priest or churchman as such, thereby tending to make
him yet more proud and insolent; (4) That if they relieved
any worthy clergyman in distress they were to regard him
in the light of a private person only ;! (5) That they would
not assist or support with gold or silver any king, potentate
or government whatsoever, save only by payment of taxes ;
(6) That they would not help any popular movement or
private cabal in revolt against any government; (7) That
they would leave public affairs in the hands of God, Who
will bring to pass the events foretold in the ApocaLypsr of
St. ‘Fohn, which events are even now in the course of rapid
fulfilment. It will be seen that the old Second Advent
thesis recurs herein.

1 The Order in that branch with which de Chazal was connected seems
to have been militantly anti-clerical: it would be difficult to think that its
certificates in Russia embodied such requirements.

552

-- Page 590 --
English Rosicructanism

There are three further points which call for particular
notice. (1) The Bacstrom Certificate defines the Brethren
of the Rosy Cross as a Company of those who believe in the
great atonement made by Jesus Christ on the Rosy Cross,
described as “stained and marked with His blood,” for
the redemption of spiritual natures. This determines the
judgment of a branch of the Order on the significance of
its own symbol as formulated in the last years of the
eighteenth century. It does not explain, however, in
virtue of what necessity an association of physical al-
chemists should be incorporated under the bond of Christian
faith. Supposing that metals can be transmuted by a
chemical process it is difficult to credit that a Jew, as Jew,
is incapable of performing the experiment with success. It
seems to follow either that the Brethren of the Rosy Cross
arrogated to themselves a special and divine election to the
ars magna of secret chemistry by reason of their Christian
faith or that behind and beyond the physical work there
was one of a spiritual nature which could only be performed
in Christ.

(2) It is especially laid down that the Order does not
exclude a worthy woman from initiation and on the
contrary will not hesitate to receive her as an Apprentice,
or even as a practical member and master, if she possesses
the work practically and has herself accomplished it. The
reasons given are: that there is no distinction of sexes
in the spiritual world, whether among blessed angels or
rational spirits of the human race; that redemption was
manifested to mankind by means of the Blessed Virgin ; that
salvation—“ which is of more value infinitely than our
whole Art ”-—is granted to the female sex as well as to the
male; that Semiramis Queen of Egypt, Miriam the
prophetess and Peronella the wife of Nicolas Flamel are
believed to have been all possessors of the Great Work ; and
lastly that Leona Constantia, Abbess of Clermont, was

553

-- Page 591 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
actually received into the Order as a practical member and
“master ” in the year 1736. If we take the last statement
for a moment at its face value and the date as it stands, the
year 1736 would mark a period prior to any probable
connection between Freemasonry and the Rosy Cross,
all later claims notwithstanding. No Masonic quali-
fication was therefore required, and—as shewn already
—there was no reason why women should be excluded.
Whether or not the story of Leona Constantia is a
mere legend or pious fiction, there came a time
when the only known Rosicrucian Order of 1736 passed
under the Masonic egis and ipso facto would have ceased
to receive women. But in 1794 it was just emerging
from the alembics of the French Revolution, and notwith-
standing its claim on Masonic connection ab origine,
it may have dropped the Masonic qualification. It
seems a tolerable hypothesis therefore that the Societas
Rose@ Crucis, as represented by one of its “‘ worthy mem-
bers” then located at Mauritius, was another development
of the Golden and Rosy Cross. We shall see, however, that
if in such case it had abandoned Masonic qualifications
it had also abandoned Ritual, and this strains the hypothesis.

(3) There was a promise on the part of every member
that—for the benefit, as it is observed, of worthy men—
each of them before he departed this life would instruct
one or at the most two persons in the secret knowledge, he
or they being worthy, upright, well-meaning and desirous
of secret science; that he would also initiate and receive
him or them into the Society as members or apprentices,
after the same manner that he had been received himself.
It is obvious that this undertaking connotes a pre-Ritual
period of the Order, such as may have corresponded to the
procedure of 1710, or even earlier. There are traces also
in general alchemical history of the Secret Art being
perpetuated in this manner from Master to chosen pupil.

554

-- Page 592 --
English Rosicructanism

The Societas Rose@ Crucis was obviously securing its
transmission from age to age. It may be noted in this
connection that Sigismund Bacstrom promised in the tenth
clause of his undertaking ever to remember with gratitude
that worthy friend and Brother by whom he had been
initiated and received, to respect and “ oblige ” him so far
as lay in his power, after the same manner as, on his own
part, he who had admitted him was pledged to some earlier
Brother who had received himself. My conclusion is that
the Comte de Chazal belonged to a branch of the Order
which is not to be identified with the Golden and Rosy
Cross, as the latter existed in 1777; its root may perhaps
be referable to the system of which Sigmund Richter
became the spokesman in his work on the Philosophical
Stone, or to some still earlier development.

There is one word more on the document and it arises
out of the manner laid down for the examination of persons
who called themselves Brothers of the Rosy Cross. It does
not appear that vouchers of initiation were carried in the
form of a particular jewel or cross, or that certain formule
were interchanged as a test of status. The claimant was
called upon to shew (1) a precise explanation of the Universal
Fire of Nature ; (2) of the Rosicrucian magnet for attract-
ing and magnifying this fire under the form of a salt ; (3)
adequate acquaintance with the work of the Order; and
(4) knowledge of the universal dissolvent, including the
use thereof. The inference is that at least some further
acquaintance with these secret things was communicated to
the neophyte, or he was put in the way of attaining them at
an early period of his novitiate. Were it a tolerable
hypothesis—which I do not indeed think—to advance that
such arcana call to be understood allegorically, then the
meaning concealed behind them would be that which he
was taught or was at least led to discover, and thereon in his
turn he would test the claimants whom he met. Till the

555

-- Page 593 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
eve and night before the French Revolution gave place to
its tempestuous dawn, the eighteenth century had been
an age of errant adepts, of professional masters and claimants
to the Rosy Cross in many a land and city. The cataclysm
swallowed up the last generation, and the memorial dated
from Mauritius is like a solitary survival.

As to the whereabouts, if still extant, of the original
Bacstrom Certificate I have no knowledge. I am acquainted
with two copies, in manuscript, one belonging to the year
1842 and in my possession, while the other has passed
through my hands. Included with the first in the same
volume there is a separate manuscript, entitled AngcpoTEs
oF LE Comte vE Cuazat, F..R..C.. and - ontaining what
I presume to be the only available particulars concerning
him. It should be explained that the title is a device of
the scribe who made the copy and that the document
comprises a single letter of considerable length, addressed
by Dr. Sigismund Bacstrom to a correspondent, named
Alexander Tilloch, who had asked for particulars concern-
ing the late Louis de Chazal. I propose to summarise in
full that which was furnished, premising that the content
of the letter forms a consecutive narrative.

(1) The acquaintance with de Chazal began in Mauritius.
(2) He is described as the most learned as well as the most
opulent man in the island, his landed estate and other
property being worth three million Spanish piastres,
though he followed no profession or business. (3) He is
said to have educated a hundred orphan girls and to have
provided them with marriage dowries totalling another
million piastres. (4) His more private charities were also
very numerous. (5) As to the source of his revenues, he
received annually considerable sums from Bordeaux. (6)
Dr. Bacstrom affirms that he had inspected a manuscript in
the Count’s autograph, containing an account of his
experiments and cures by means of animal magnetism,

556

-- Page 594 --
English Rosicrucianism
electricity and galvanism. (7) Though resident at the time
in Mauritius he was cognisant of all that took place in Paris
during the horrors of the French Revolution, including
the execution of the French King and Queen, while all
communication was suspended between France, Mauritius
and the adjacent island of Bourbon. (8) He kept a journal
of that which he saw or learned, and its accuracy was
verified twelve months after when news from Europe was
brought by an American ship. (9) Bacstrom was introduced
to de Chazal by Dr. Petit Radel, a learned Parisian
physician who escaped the guillotine by flight, leaving all
that he possessed behind him, so that he was now secretly
supported by the Count. (10) Bacstrom paid three visits to
de Chazal, the last of which extended over eight days. (11)
He became an intimate friend, inspected his rich collection
of gold medals, precious stones, philosophical, astronomical
and mathematical instruments, his library and laboratory.
(12) De Chazal informed him that he possessed the Lapis
Philosophorum and also the Animal Stone. (13) The text
at this point is doubtful, but I understand it to mean that
he owed to the one all the wealth at his command and to the
other his robust health at the age of ninety-seven. (14)
The Count kept the best table in the island, and one day
after dinner he took Bacstrom into his laboratory and
caused him to perform in his presence an alchemical
experiment, under his supervision and direction, as a result
of which there was produced (a) gold of thirty carats, but
exceedingly brittle ; (2) most glorious, soft and ductile gold
of twenty-four carats; (c) a gold of yet more glorious
colour, somewhat heavier than the former. (15) The
memorial relates further that Comte de Chazal found by
frequent conversations that Bacstrom was acquainted with
the theory of the Lapis Philosophorum and with the classic
writers on alchemy. (16) He therefore initiated him and
then communicated his practical labours. (17) Bacstrom
557

-- Page 595 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

“ wrote down from his mouth ” the whole procedure of the
Lapis Animalis, there being five or six different methods,
all leading to the same end. (18) The Count affirmed that
Lapis Animalis was the easiest of all works ; that it was best
elaborated by Nature alone, apart from artificial heat,
because the subject was so extremely tender; that he had
succeeded in his first attempt during the second year after
his arrival at Port Louis; and that in proceeding he had
followed the instructions which he had received in Paris,
anno 1740. (19) Finally, the Count offered Bacstrom
30,000 Spanish dollars if he would prolong his stay for a
year, “in order to work the process once more from the
beginning.” (20) Whether or not Bac trom was a ship’s
doctor does not explicitly appear, but it 1s said that he dared
not comply, having orders from the President of the
Colonial Assembly to go on board the Harriet (Captain
Daddy), bound for New York. (21) At this news, it is added
that the worthy old man wept like a child and lamented that
he had not been introduced to him three months sooner.
(22) Subsequently he mustered up all the money there was
in the house, amounting to about three hundred dollars,
and begged Bacstrom to accept it as a small token of his
sincere friendship. (23) It remains only to add that the
Comte de Chazal was married and that Madame la Comtesse
is mentioned once during the course of the narrative.

The letter of Sigismund Bacstrom is dated March 16,
1804, and concludes by assuring his correspondent that it
contains practically all that he can remember of his different
conversations with him who was his father in alchemy. The
next question before us is to ascertain what is possible con-
cerning the pupil who became under such exceptional
circumstances a neophyte of the Rosy Cross. It happens
that he wrote much upon alchemy, and I have met with
amateurs of the art who prized his texts, but the devotion
paid to them was entirely of a private kind, among a few

558

-- Page 596 --
English Rosicructanism

who had secured copies, for so far as I am able to trace not
a line of them has entered into print. The Rev. W.
Alexander Ayton, the student part of whose life was spent
among the rarities of all occult literature, but perhaps
especially of alchemy, had not only an intimate acquaintance
with the Bacstrom manuscripts but had attempted to follow
some of their practical processes—without success, however,
as there should be no need to say. His transcripts passed
into hands where it has proved impossible to follow them ;
but there are others, I believe, if not the original autographs,
which are somewhere in theosophical keeping and are said
to be jealously guarded. One does not get further commonly
in this kind of quest, but the fact may be registered with
detachment, as any possible importance would be only of
the textual kind, and we have texts enough and to spare
against any future experiment in decoding the symbolism
or separating the wheat from the chaff in the chaos magnum
of the literature.

It is doubtless unnecessary to add that biographical
dictionaries do not concern themselves with Sigismund
Bacstrom and that I have found no allusion to him in the
ordinary or extraordinary sources of reference in occult
literature, with the sole exception of Tur Rostcrucian
anp Masonic Recorp, but that is by derivation from the
Certificate countersigned by de Chazal, which I printed in
extenso over thirty years ago. It is barely possible that a
Diary or A Rostcructan PuitosopHer, which I once
transcribed from a copy in the autograph of Frederick
Hockley may have been drawn from the Bacstrom manu-
scripts. It belongs to the year 1797 and contains very
curious notes on diurnal proceedings in a laboratory
undertaken for the purposes of the Great Work. The text
is accompanied by crude diagrams of an explanatory kind,
but it breaks off abruptly, leaving the experiments un-
finished. I suppose that believers—if any at this day—in

559

-- Page 597 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

the occult arts and especially of those branches represented
by the Hockley collections would aver that the adept was
brought to a pause of necessity by the fact that subsequent
to his last entry he accomplished the Magnum Opus, and
could therefore put nothing in writing. The evidence
for this is like the evidence for the assertion in the title—
that the Diary was actually that of a Rosicrucian Philosopher.
It may be added that there was a William Bacstrom, who
also appears to have been concerned in occult activities, but
whether he was related to Sigismund there is no means of
knowing.

It is to be presumed that the communication which has
been summarised here at length was written in England to
a correspondent who was also in England, and as I have no
doubt whatever that the Bacstrom Certificate is a genuine
document of its period, it follows that a Brother of the Rosy
Cross was resident in these islands at the beginning of the
nineteenth century. Moreover, as an earnest alchemist,
student and operator of the art he would have fulfilled the
simple conditions imposed upon him at his reception into
the particular branch of the Order: in other words, he
would have appointed his successor. A transmission could
have been established in this manner, but there is of course
no evidence that it was.

To the period of Bacstrom there belongs the Baal Shem
of London, Dr. Samuel Jacob Falk, a Kabalist who claimed
to possess thaumaturgic powers, and is rumoured to have
been connected with some association or brotherhood, the
name and nature of which do not emerge. On such
authority as this the makers of myth have integrated him
in the Rosicrucian Order.1 He appears to have died in 1782.?

1 See a most explicit statement to this effect in Westcott’s History oF
THE Soc. Ros., p. 5.

® See Abbé Fournier, p. 84, for an account of Dr. Fale (or Falk) in
England. He states that some people regarded him as Chief of all the Jews
and his ministry as purely political.

560

-- Page 598 --
English Rosicrucianism

He is a subject of reference in the important Rainsford
Papers, to which I shall advert immediately ; but General
Rainsford—whose record they are—remained in doubt
whether he was a knave or not, though his banker’s son
at the Hague testified that he was not only a profound
Kabalist but a very holy man.t There was also—
according to Kenneth Mackenzie—a certain Cain Schenul
Falk, otherwise Dr. Falcon,?, who is represented as
possibly or probably distinct from the former and as
living in London circa 1788. Either he or his son
Johann Friedrich Falk is affirmed to have been the head of
a Kabalistic College and to have died about 1824.3 He is
included by Kenneth Mackenzie among known members of
the Rosy Cross, the warrants being wanting as usual. Occult-
ists and Masonic speculators in the past and now have failed
to realise that the Rosy Cross was a Christian Order
always and only; the Jew, therefore, had no place in its
ranks, whatever his qualifications as a Kabalist and whatever
his thaumaturgic powers. It remained for spurious High
Grade Masonry, drawing unawares from Rosicrucian
sources in the Eighteenth Degree, to cast out the essential
Christian elements from the Rose-Croix of Heredom for
the admission of Jews and Deists.

The Rosicrucian allusions in the Rainsford Papers‘ are
comparatively few, but they serve to establish the following
points : (1) That General Rainsford was on the quest of the
Rosy Cross, understood presumably as an occult and
magical Order ; (2) That he was evidently received into a
Society of this kind, the particulars of place and time being
alike wanting ; (3) That there is some ground for inferring
that his admission took place in London ; (4) That in 1785

1 See Chevalier de Rampson: Mémorres, for a Falk reference and some
curious details.

2 The Baal Shem of London was known under this name.

3 The Jewisn Encycropzpia knows nothing of this alleged personality.

4 See British Museum, Additional MSS, 23644-680.

20 561

-- Page 599 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

he was apparently attached to something of the same kind
then working in Paris and made use of its cipher on one
occasion; (5) That the English society is referred to under
the denomination R.«.Cru oF (6) That in this case it
was probably working the scheme of Degrees adopted at the
German reformation of 1777; (7) That some German
Notes on Alchemy, entitled Instructio et Manipulatio ex
Ordinatione et Concordia Fratrum, were signed by Rainsford
with the Mystic Name Sphere fondus in Salis, which is not
translatable but belongs to a high Grade of the Rite in
question ; (8) That in a letter written at Harwich in October,
1782, he mentions having met with certain Hebrew MSS.
at Algiers, and that they related to the Society of Rosi-
crucians, “which exists at present under another name
with the same forms”; (9) That he refers on another
occasion to a respectable, honorable et trés vénérable Fraternité.
This is the sum of the allusions, and they leave no doubt
in my mind that the writer was received into some branch of
the Golden and Rosy Cross. We know by the evidence of
one of its Adept Rituals that a variation of the German
Rite was extant in France prior to the Revolution, and it is
possible that there was an English branch, but our sole
source of information on the subject is the single Rainsford
reference, unfortunately of the vaguest kind. It is im-
possible to base even the most tentative hypothesis on such
an allusion.

We do not meet with any further reference to the Order
in England till the year 1836, when Godfrey Higgins
published Anacaryesis, in the course of which he remarks
that he had not sought admission among Rosicrucians or
Templars, because it would involve pledges which might
be detrimental to his work of research. It has been con-
cluded by unwise speculation that a branch of the old
Order was at that time established in England, but there
is no evidence for the view. The Templars cited in the

562

-- Page 600 --
English Rostcructanism

passage were the Masonic Order of that denomination, and
the legitimate inference is that the Rosicrucians were the
Knights Rose-Croix, whom we know to have been at work
at the period both within and without the jurisdiction of
a Supreme Council, otherwise of the Scottish Rite. Alter-
natively, Higgins may have referred to the Rosy Cross
connected with the Royal Order of Scotland. He was a
Craft Mason, acquainted with Masonic activities, and
there is the fullest evidence in his writings that he had no
canon of distinction between things which differed from
one another, though they passed under the same name.
A typical case in point is the Masonic Knights Templar,
whose descent from the old chivalry was accepted implicitly
by Higgins. It remains to say that those who have put
forward the counter-view, talking glibly of a Rosicrucian
College ruled by a Magus and conferring Degrees during
the first half of the nineteenth century, on the authority
of Godfrey Higgins, are persons whose opinion on any
question of scholarship or ordinary research can be set
aside at once and utterly.

Before proceeding to the final concern of the present
chapter it is interesting and curious to note that about
1860, and in Manchester above all places, there flourished
a Rosicrucian Brotherhood for a considerable number of
years. The particulars verifiable concerning it are, how-
ever, (1) that it was an Antiquarian Society, without
pretensions of any kind; (2) that the only mystery con-
cerning it is its choice of the particular name; (3) that it
met at the houses of members; (4) that its convocations
were called chapters; (5) that reports of its activities
appeared occasionally in Tue Mancuester Guarpian,
one explanation being (6) that the editor of this newspaper,
John Harland, belonged to the Brotherhood ; (7) that it
was concerned with topographical, historical, architectural
questions and so forth ; (8) that it knew and cared nothing

563

-- Page 601 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
for so-called occult sciences and had no views on the legend
of Christian Rosy Cross ; (9) that on one occasion at least
there was a volume of antiquarian interest published
under its auspices; (10) that its occasional meetings con-
tinued till the end of 1869, if not later.

The next event in this country was the foundation of
the Masonic Rosicrucian Society, otherwise Societas Rost-
cruciana in Anglia, usually abbreviated by familiars, who
speak of it as the Soc. Ros. It has been taken over by
unfriendly critics and applied in a derisive sense. ‘The
chronological story of this institution, with many of its
Minutes in abstract, will be found in occasional Transac-
tions—s.v. London—-at the British Museum. But as
regards the circumstances of its origin recourse must be
had to two publications issued by the present “ Supreme
Magus,” Dr. W. Wynn Westcott, the first being History
OF THE SocieTas Rosicruciana in ANGLIA, 1900 and the
second Data or THE Hisrory or THE Rosicrucians, 1916.
It appears from these pamphlets that the Soc. Ros. was
projected in 1865 and started in 1866 by Robert Wentworth
Little, described as originally a clerk at Freemasons’ Hall
and subsequently Secretary of the Royal Institution for
Girls.

The allegations are (1) that Little found and borrowed or
abstracted certain papers, containing “ Ritual information,”
preserved in the Grand Lodge Library ; (2) that they had
been discovered before him by William Henry White,
who was Grand Secretary till 1857; (3) that White himself
was among “ the last survivors” of an English Rosicrucian
Society, holding from a Venetian Ambassador to England
in the eighteenth century who had “ conferred Rosicrucian
Grades” on students in England, and the said students
had handed “on the rule and tradition to others”;
(4) that according to Dr. Westcott, White “ made no use ”
of the Grand Lodge MSS., but according to another

564

-- Page 602 --
English Rosicrucianism

deponent, who will be cited presently, White admitted
Little, not apparently by the powers committed to him as
an initiate and from “ Ritual information” in his own
possession but from the papers in Grand Lodge ; (5) that
this notwithstanding these papers were “imperfect for
ceremonial open use”; (6) that on finding them after
White’s “‘ retirement from office ’—as stated by the other
deponent—Little called to his assistance Kenneth R. H.
Mackenzie, who claimed that when in Germany he had
been admitted by some “ German Adepts” into certain
Grades of a Rosicrucian system and had been licensed to
form a group of Masonic students in England, “ under the
Rosicrucian name.”

The critical position of these statements may be sum-
marised thus : (1) There is some slender ground for believing
that papers were abstracted from Grand Lodge, because
in the month of September, 1871, Matthew Cooke “ raised
a complaint in Grand Lodge against Masonic officials for
discovering, using and removing old MSS. from the Record
Rooms of Freemasons’ Hall.” This is on the authority
of Dr. Westcott, who adds that the missing documents were
applied to a reconstruction of the Red Cross of Rome and
Constantine as well as the foundation of the Soc. Ros.
It will be observed, however, that Cooke’s complaint was
about the removal of old MSS., not otherwise specified.
If reference to Rosicrucian documents was intended,
there is negative evidence that they were not returned
to Grand Lodge as they are not to be found therein.
They have also disappeared otherwise, as Dr. Westcott
tells us that they did not come into the possession of
either Supreme Magus in succession to Little, who assumed
or received that title in 1866. I should add that the only
evidence for Little personally discovering or removing
MSS. rests on the second deponent. (2) Dr. Westcott
cites a letter from the Rev. T. F. Ravenshaw, once a Grand

565

-- Page 603 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
Chaplain of England, no information emerging concerning
the person to whom it was addressed. It is the authority
for the story concerning a nameless Venetian Ambassador,
for White as a last survivor of some English Society, for
Little’s admission by him, and for the alleged papers
coming into the possession of Little after White’s retire-
ment. But without prejudice to the bona fides of Raven-
shaw the depositions in this letter admittedly represent
explanations made to the writer by Little himself. It
follows that the whole story depends on the latter’s good
faith, and this is the question at issue.t (3) As regards
Kenneth Mackenzie, his share in the foundation or recon-
struction is not mentioned apparently in the record of
Ravenshaw. Dr. Westcott tells us that it depends on letters
from Mackenzie to himself and Dr. Woodman, the second
Supreme Magus. We are again in the same position, repos-
ing on a question of good faith, and in the present case it is
precisely and very much at issue. On Rosicrucian subjects
at least the record of Kenneth Mackenzie is one of recurring
mendacity, a typical instance of which is the Table of
Rosicrucian Degrees published in his Royan Masonic
CycLopmpza, for the first time as he states, but it appeared
at the close of the eighteenth century in Tue Rosrcrucian
Unveitep of Magister Pianco, and I have referred to it
on previous occasions. It follows therefore—and this is
the historical state of the case concerning the Soc. Ros.
(1) That any representations on Rosicrucian matters made
verbally or in writing to any one by Mackenzie must be
set aside decisively in the absence of collateral evidence.

1 Dr, Westcott confuses his own case, either by citing a letter distinct
from that of Ravenshaw as “ literary extant evidence . . . in possession of
the Society,” without explaining its source and tenour, or by quoting the
Ravenshaw Script at two points of his story, once in the absence of details
and once with content summarised. See Joc. cit., pp. 6, 7. My inference
is that he is alluding to one document, which—as I have shewn above—is
not evidential by itself.

566

-- Page 604 --
English Rosicructanism

But in the case there is none forthcoming. (2) That Little’s
credentials, if any, reside in the fact that he removed papers
from Freemasons’ Hall and that there is no evidence of
their return. A certain probability attaches to the point
of fact, owing to the vague accusation of Matthew Cooke,
but there is nothing evidential. (3) That Little’s story
to Ravenshaw is without probability in itself, is contra-
dicted by Dr. Westcott, and it does not appear that Raven-
shaw had opportunity or sought to check the statements.
(4) That in 1866 Mackenzie was a Mason only under some
foreign and apparently unacknowledged Obedience, and
because of the Masonic qualification enacted from Candidate,
and Members he could not belong to the Society whichs
according to his unsupported story, he had helped to found.
He was made a regular Mason in 1870 and joined the Soc.
Ros. towards the close of 1872. According to the Minutes,
he was proposed on April 11th and “ initiated ” on October
17th. I gather that Dr. Westcott did not become a member
till some time after the death of Little in 1878, and I
suggest that Mackenzie’s communications to him and Wood.
man. were subsequent to that date.

Such is the clouded story of the Soc. Ros. in respect of
its origin. Its history is in the trivial Transactions, about
which and on the scholarship of early members I gave
adequate views in 1888, and there is no need torepeat. The
Metropolitan and other Colleges work the scheme of Grades
which we know by the Rituals of the Order Reformation in
1777. But they are not those Rituals, nor are they the
work of one who has seen them. They are mere vestiges
of procedure, a frivolous and childish pretence. Let those
who belong to the Society compare their Grades of Philoso-
phus and Adeptus Minor with my summaries of the corre-
sponding German and other Rituals in the present volume.

567

-- Page 605 --
CHAPTER XXI
A MODERN ROSICRUCIAN ORDER
For a period of about twenty-five years, dating approxi-
mately from 1860, the existence of amateur manufactories
of Rites in England is made evident by the facts of their
output, otherwise by certain successive products, for which
all antecedent history is wanting, except in the pseudo-
traditional sense, which is that of occult invention. My
statement does not signify that in the various coinages
produced by the mints in question there was no attempt
to collect materials from the past, so that they might
make some colourable claim thereon. There were begotten
under these circumstances at the beginning of the period
in question the Red Cross of Constantine and its appur-
tenances, laying claim upon archives in the possession of
Waller Rodwell Wright—not to speak of the alleged
document abstracted from Grand Lodge, as already noted.
It does not belong to our subject and is passed over for
this reason. Much about the same time there emerged
also that Socteras Rosicruciana 1n ANGLIA with which
I have dealt adequately in the previous chapter. The
manufactory, mint or studio of Degrees—if J may
venture so far to mix and confuse images—was not pre-
cisely the same in both cases, but some artificer or alchemist
of the one was not absent from the other. Kenneth
Mackenzie might be one of the connecting links, and
there are other names which it would be possible to quote
at need, giving reasons in each case, but again their activities
568

-- Page 606 --
A Modern Rosicrucian Order
are outside the present issues. I am concerned now with
another centre, actuated by very different motives. It
was situated in the West of England and connects with
the interesting name of Major F. G. Irwin, who in
1863 was Eminent Commander of the William Stuart
Encampment and Grand Standard Bearer of the Grand
Conclave of Knights Templar. So far as my present
purpose is concerned, the record begins in 1874 and there
is some evidence that the activity of the people in question
went on to the year 1887 at least. Major Irwin began
life as a private soldier, but his abilities were such and
their recognition also was such that he received a com-
mission in the regiment to which he belonged, an exceed-
ingly rare honour in those days. His name became known
to me when I] discovered that he was third—so to speak—
in a race of collectors concerned with occult manuscripts.
The first was Frederick Hockley, who was devoted more
especially to magical and alchemical texts, and whose
transcripts of less or more documents in a good scribe’s
hands were illustrated for the most part with seals, sigils,
signatures and symbolical drawings, sometimes of a very
elaborate kind. The collection thus made by his own skill
and industry has become almost historical, but it was
unfortunately dispersed at his death in 1887. Most of it
was purchased by Walter Moseley, who was thus second
in succession and was like his predecessor what is called
a practical student ; but whereas Hockley appears to have
been content with employing clairvoyant subjects, skryers
in crystals and persons who could be passed into the mag-
netic trance, Moseley is said to have tried more dangerous
paths. The particulars are vague and as the authority is
second-hand, I give it under all reserves, but I have been
told that his health was injured seriously by the use of
drugs for occult purposes, under the guidance of Paschal
B. Randolph, about whom we shall hear in the next chapter
569

-- Page 607 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

but one. It is of course wholly possible that the story is
an idle fabrication. As intimated, the third in succession
was F. G. Irwin, to whom many Hockley manuscripts
passed over by purchase on the death of Moseley. He was
a believer in occult arts within the measure of a thinking
and reading person of his particular mental class, but for
the rest was satisfied apparently with the pursuits of
spiritualism, to the truth of which his circle bears witness in
unpublished writings. For the rest, it is obvious from all I
have ascertained concerning him that he was a zealous
and amiable Mason, with a passion for Rites and an
ambition to add to their number. He seems to have worked
with others of some ability and of some inventive power
in these paths, but through lack of education they were
uncertain in the use of English and in their ill-starred
fascination for Latin formule were always at sea.

In the year 1874 it seems to have dawned upon them that
the time was at hand to launch upon an unenlightened
world the revelations of a new Order of the Rosy Cross, and
they saw to it that there should be not only a claim made
upon the known past of the subject but upon many centuries
behind it. The manuscript which embodies the first experi-
mental draft extends to 383 quarto pages and was begun on
December 7 of the year in question. It was called THE Star
Ris1nc 1n THE East, or a brilliant Light Revealed unto all men
by 5. N. These letters can be construed as one likes into
suggestive Latin mottoes, but they happen to be the
terminals of an illustrious occult name, that of Thomas
Vaughan and even used by him in 1651 on the title-page
of Auta Lucis. Passing onward, the introduction to the
manuscript is signed Thomas Vaughan, and his name or
initials can be found throughout the text. The intention
was therefore to present it as his actual work. In virtue
of what ignorance and illiteracy any person could have
supposed that this pretence would impose on anyone is

57°

-- Page 608 --
Al Modern Rosicructan Order

beyond apprehension, at least on my part. There is no
attempt—colourable or otherwise—to reproduce the
manner of seventeenth century writing, for it would
have exceeded the capacity of the circle. The bulk of the
document consists of feeble disquisition of a sentimental
religious kind, teeming with grammatical blunders and
orthographic curiosities, interwoven with which are (1)
occult theses which betray no grasp of their subject ;
(2) the long story of an Italian monk who became a Rosi-
crucian but fell into the hands of the Inquisition and
escaped the extreme penalty only by the intervention of
the Brotherhood: it is the poorest quality of invention,
apart from all verisimilitude ; (3) notions on Rosicrucian
doctrine, mostly reflections and ridiculous when they are
not ; (4) a traditional history of the Rosy Cross ; and (5)
sketches of secret receptions into the Order, including
fragments of Ritual, with very indifferent prayers and
invocations. The work is accompanied by diagrams and
variations of familiar occult symbols. It might seem
desirable to dismiss it at this point, but it happens that I
have an ulterior purpose in view, apart from which the
autograph volume would call for no further reference than
a brief bibliographical note. Because of this purpose
I proceed to a summary account of the central idea con-
cerning the Rosy Cross and what it is shewn to have been
doing in 1874.

It is a most reverend, ancient and sacred Society which
has existed for a great space of time in silence and hidden
light but it is at last emerging from darkness because of
false pretenders. The name of Rosy Cross refers to the
sacrifice of Jesus Christ upon the Tree and to the pouring
forth of His blood thereon. This sacrifice was typified in
all the Ancient Mysteries, and as those who belong to the
Order look upon Jesus as the long-expected Messiah—
though not apparently as God manifested in flesh—He may

571

-- Page 609 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
be called their Founder, and He it is Who is the Master of
the Rosy Cross. He was an Angel of the Third Hierarchy
before coming into this world. The origin of the Order
is to be sought in Egypt and India, among a body of priest-
philosophers who were called Searchers of Light and who
pursued the study of theosophy and mystic chemistry under
strict pledges of silence, some 1700 years B.c. Candidates
for admission into their sanctuaries passed through seven
years of preparation. ‘Those who attained the higher
Grades were entrusted with all the secret knowledge and
were bound to select some worthy person to succeed them
in the event of their death. About 800 x.c. this association
was established in Greece and later on among the Jews,
where the name of Essenes was assumed. When Jesus of
Nazareth attained the due age he was received in one of
their convents. Some time after the destruction of
Jerusalem members were transferred into another Order in
Europe, being that of the Rosy Cross, and as time went on
men of knowledge and influence entered the ranks. Rumours
went abroad concerning them during the course of the
fifteenth century, and ultimately their claims were set forth
‘ in certain official proclamations. Their object was to unite
the Rose and the Cross, to seek the Mountain of Light
and to erect a Spiritual Temple thereupon. They were
workers also in metals, for the elevation of those which
are base into the state of pure gold by means of fire. The
process of such transmutation is typical of the search after
God and His light, and it is presumably in this sense that
the procedure is said to be both physical and spiritual, the
alchemy of metals and that of the soul or spirit.

After this manner does the traditional history of the
Order—which is apart from all novelty—merge into the
quests pursued therein. It is said further that in the
fourteenth century it was divided into two sodalities,
being (1) Seekers of Theosophical or Divine Knowledge

572

-- Page 610 --
A Modern Rosicrucian Order

and (z) Seekers of Gold. In the seventeenth century these
Brethren assumed the titles respectively of Fratres Auree
Crucis and Fratres Rosez Crucis. Inthe eighteenth century
they were unified once more and so remain as the true
Order of the Rosy Cross, entirely unconnected with
political and other bodies in Germany which have assumed
this name and have brought dishonour thereon. ‘There
arose also a Soctetas Rubee Crucis—otherwise Rouge Croix—
which adopted the symbolic jewel of the Order in its
higher Grades—namely, a pelican in its piety, typical of
the Great Mysteries. This was incorporated later on with
the Society of Speculative Masons; but the true Brother-
hood of the Rosy Cross has never been merged in any other
Society, and by the grace of God will ever maintain its
individuality and its secret existence.

Upon what may be called the doctrinal instructions
of this mythical Order there is little reason to dwell.
There are disquisitions on the Godhead prior to creation,
the Trinity in unity, the idea of creation and the develop-
ment of cosmic order out of the first chaos. There are
theses on the soul and immortality, on the experience
of death and preparation for life to come. There was
also a species of Magia practised by the Brotherhood,
concerning which it is said that those who would
commune face to face with the denizens of the inner world
must prepare themselves according to true rules. The
allusion is to those creatures of the elements which are
a subject of vague allusion in Fama Fraterniratis, but
are treated at large in the tale of the Comte bE Gasauis.
It is on this comic romance rather than on anterior tracts
of Paracelsus that the text appears to depend, for the very
simple reason that—for the most part—the latter had not
been translated in 1874. On this basis, as if on a rock of
truth, we are told that the spirits of the elements are
kind, beneficent and willing to aid man in his search for

573

-- Page 611 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
knowledge. This is especially the case with those of fire,
who are apparently like the letter H in the rhymed apologue:
they assist ‘‘ at his birth and attend him in death ”—fire
being the hope of the alchemist and a great aid of the
magus. For this reason the Order appears to have practised
cremation. It is said that at the burial of a Frater R..C..
he was received into the communion of fire, his disused
garment being laid to rest therein, while “ prayers of more
than mortal sweetness”? were recited over it. Finally,
there is much alchemical speculation, but it is the record
of persons who are astray in the Hermetic labyrinth and
do not know what they say. I pass therefore to the hypo-
thetical scheme of initiation and things leading up thereto.

There are seven cardinal precepts of the Rosy Cross
which appertain as much to the preparation of a postulant
as to self conduct within the secret circles. They are these,
expressed briefly: (1) To be ductile and pure as a child,
giving prompt obedience to all lawful commands of
Superiors. (2) To eschew unprofitable speculations, especi-
ally those of the mystics, or so-called ‘‘ Watchers for God,”
and to weigh all things carefully for the attainment of
that truth which is the sole object of research. (3) To
adore the Great Sun, remembering that a Brother of the
Rosy Cross can worship in all Temples, so only that there
is no sacrifice of living creatures performed therein. (4) To
treat all men in a spirit of gentleness and love, whatever
their form of faith. (5) To follow earnestly the quest of
light and knowledge, alike in spiritual and material things.
(6) To seek the Good and the True in all things and to
proclaim it everywhere. (7) When the end of quest has
come ; when that powder has been found which is priceless
above all powders, the elixir which is more than all known
medicines—transmuting the base into the pure and evil
into good; when the seeker stands at the Gate of Life,
Jet him remember that beyond the darkness of the threshold

574

-- Page 612 --
AA Modern Rosicructan Order
and the dweller thereby, the glorious light is shining on
the Angel of light and glory and the company of the elect.
They are the elect of the Rosy Cross; and at their hands
shall the seeker receive his guerdon, or otherwise the Grade
of Master for him who by his own efforts and their instruc-
tion has attained the threshold thereof.

Now, it is said that the New Jerusalem, of the Crown and
Fountain of Light, may be compared to a Temple, and it
is this Temple which all true Brethren of the Rosy Cross
desire to erect on earth, in the grace of the Rose of Sharon.
It is represented by the Holy Sanctuary of the Order,
wherein the Conventions are held. Wheresoever the
Brethren meet for the ceremonial purposes of the Rite
is said to be in the City of Jerusalem, under the shadow of
the Mount of Olives. It is otherwise an oblong room and
comparable therefore to the authorised configuration of
a Masonic Lodge. As regards the content of the Rite
there are said to be three primary and six secondary Grades,
and though only two of them are named—being those of
Magi and Magistri—it is obvious that they are the sequence
of the Golden and Rosy Cross as established at the Reforma-
tion of 1777, though I should infer that the circle derived
them from the shadowy reflection of the Socreras Rosicrvu-
cranain Anouia, of which they were aware. It is said also
that “the number of the Brethren who meet under the
shadow of the Mount of Olives is limited to the progressions
of the number three,” as e.g. 27, 36, 72, 81, 144, or—as it
is added by way of precaution—“ a lesser number.” The
general jewel of the Order is described as an emblem of
the Heavenly City; but whereas this is represented
descending four-square out of heaven, that is said to have
sixteen sides or faces, bearing many characters and emblems
which the authors did not “dare” to put on record at
the time of writing. Had the scheme gone further they
would probably have thought them out. We hear also

575

-- Page 613 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

of a room in reservation for the meetings of Superiors and
representing “the Sepulchre of Jesus,” where “ secret
instructions were obtained from the Governing Spirits.”
It was a place of prayer and meditation, fixed upon the
glory of the Eastern Star and on the significance of those
mystic letters which are “emblematic of the Divinity
of Jesus Christ.”

There is neither diagram nor description to indicate
the arrangement of the ordinary place of reception, except
that it contains an altar, whereon is a White Stone, repre-
senting (1) the Spirit of Life, (2) that great Temple which
is erected in the Land of Souls, (3) “‘ our Beloved Brother,
Master and Saviour Jesus Christ.” Like Him, it is “ perfect
in all its parts ” and in correspondence therefore with that
state to which every Brother of the Rosy Cross should aspire.
There are several sections which claim to be extracted
from the Ceremonial of Secret Reception, but their com-
plete chaos represents stages in the manufacture of a
Grade, devised by those who were uncertain where to
begin or what they might wish to do. To bring something
of order out of confusion grounded in incapacity is doing
too much honour ; but--as I have said—there is a purpose
in view, and by a process of sorting and piecing a tentative
conspectus of intended procedure may be evolved and left
to stand at its value, which is little enough in any ceremon-
ial sense. It is understood that there were certain qualifi-
cations required on the part of the Candidate, as for in-
stance, that he should shew himself ready to receive the
light.

In this connection we hear of a probationary period,
the length of which might be varied according to circum-
stances. ‘The object was (1) that the current of his life
might be made known to the Superior; (2) that his mind
and soul should be fitted to receive the teachings ; (3) that
he might be uplifted by the higher branches of science.

576

-- Page 614 --
4 Modern Rosicrucian Order

It was essential that he should be free from prejudice and
bigotry: otherwise the “ terrible negations ” of the first
instructions might undo him. It is said that the first
ceremonial utterances heard by the Candidate are (1) Deus
non est; (2) Pax non est; (3) Vita non est; (4) Omnta
vamitas est (sic); (5) Quod superius est stcut quod inferius—
the last not apparently in the sense of Hermetic corre-
spondence but the identity of good and bad, right and
might, vice and virtue, matter and spirit. It may be added,
however, that the said negations are an afterthought in
the process, reflected from Eliphas Lévi, and that elsewhere
there is no trace of them in the initial procedure. One is
left unconcerned therefore by the suggestion that they are
developed subsequently into higher and nobler teachings,
by which the Candidate is led to see “the littleness of
his knowledge and of himself.” Either the compilers fore-
bore wisely from delineating the kind of instruction because
they would have produced a puerility or refrained of
necessity because they could produce nothing.

On the day of reception I presume that in the mind of
the writers there would be the opening of the Temple
according to some ceremonial form, but it does not seem
to have been excogitated. We hear of the Candidate
when he is already in the presence of the assembled Brother-
hood, and he responds Ht cum spiritu tuo to the Lux
vobiscum of the Master, pronounced by way of benediction.
There is then recited Ps. cxlv ; and when it is finished the
Master places on the Candidate’s head a chaplet of red and
white roses, on his shoulders the white robe of the Order,
the “mystic cross” upon his breast and in his hand a
wand, specified as having peculiar virtue but not other-
wise described. The Recipient being clothedin this manner,
the Master places his own hand in the middle of the Seal
of Solomon—presumably on a pedestal before him—and
offers up two prayers in succession, referring to the Sacrifice

2P 577

-- Page 615 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

on Calvary as that essential condition by virtue of which
the Rose might be seen of all, for the illumination and
refreshment of all, and imploring help to follow in the path
of the Master, but most especially in the contest with
“ priestly bigotry and tyranny.” It happens unfortunately
that in the zeal “to overturn that power which bars our
progress,” the fact of a Candidate who, by the hypothesis
is also deserving light and liberation, passes altogether out
of view and nothing is besought of the Almighty in his
respect. The omission is atoned for, however, at a later
stage of the proceedings in the course of a further prayer,
but it offers otherwise nothing that demands remark.
As much or as little can be said for several further
orisons which intervene amidst a variety of rambling and
unconnected discourse.

There is a point at which questions and warnings are
addressed to the Candidate. What does he hope to attain
in the mystic Temple? Is it wealth, honour and power?
If so, let him desist from the attempt. Does he come as
a child, humbly, seeking light in the Eternal East? Is his
heart turned to the Father of all, desiring wisdom from
above? Is he filled with the love of God and of that
Blessed One Who was crucified? Then shall he be blessed
and received among them, in the Name of Him Whosuffered
little children to approach Him. But let every Aspirant
realise that those who enter the Assembly must renounce
all worldly affections, for the world will be ever at war
with them. After these and other lucubrations the upper-
most point of a Pentagram was pressed against his breast ;
he was told to trust in Adonai and to becentred in the thought
of God; to take heed lest he prove a traitor, whether to
God and His light or the Brethren, for the two avenging
points of the Pentagram would then be turned against
him and the powers of the evil ones let loose. Thereafter
he is again questioned. Will he listen to the voices of

578

-- Page 616 --
A Modern Rosicrucian Order

the Cherubim when they come forth from the Eternal
Presence? Does he long to penetrate into the Sanctuary
of angelic Governors of space? Has he been in warfare
with himself and overcome all his passions? Has he fitted
himself spiritually, as those must do who would converse
with even the lowest amiong angels, and much more there-
fore with the glorious spirits of fire? Above all, is he
willing to take upon himself the burden of the Master
Jesus, bringing offerings of gold, frankincense and myrrh
—that is to say of the true light which he hopes to obtain,
of universal love, and of tears shed in the bitter valley
of darkness and of doubt? If so, let him raise up the Holy
Cross and pledge himself solemnly to follow the quest of
God, of the Most Holy Son and of that Divine Light
Which is the Holy Spirit. This is the undertaking of the
Grade and this its sacred obligation.

It is perhaps at this stage that a crown is offered to him,
which he is expected or caused to reject. It is balanced
on the point of a sword, which signifies that those who aspire
to earthly power must be prepared to reckon with its
dangers. The renunciation, on the other hand, indicates
that those who join the Brotherhood must resign all
earthly ambitions, as they must renounce also whatsoever
would reduce them to the common level. The only aris-
tocracy recognised in the Order is that of knowledge, and
the only wealth is intellect. For the rest, he who is now
a Novice of the Order is admonished to remember the
penalty which he has invoked upon himself, should he
wilfully prove a traitor in word or deed to the Brotherhood
and its doctrine. With the point of the magical sword
let him repel all powers of evil, tempting him to forsake
the path chosen and dishonour the light therein. It were
better to have shunned the light than to embrace and then
abandon it.

At the end of this and some other orations, the new

579

-- Page 617 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
Brother of the Order is hailed as a true priest, to whom
the key of knowledge is extended with complete trust
concerning it. He is blessed in the Name of the Eternal
Father ; the Powers of the Spirit are implored to descend
upon him, that he may be filled with its glorious knowledge.
In the Name of Jenovan, of On, of Aponai the Almighty,
he is admitted as a secret member of the Sacred Temple
and Order. This is obviously the term attained of the
Ceremony, but there follows a final discourse of the Master,
in which the Novice is told that after the trials of his
initiation there are the ordeals belonging to the fulfilment
of those vows which he has taken upon himself. He cannot
truly belong to the Brotherhood of Light and still be
counted among those Children of Earth who strive for
material gain. The science of the Rosy Cross is a jealous
science, admitting of no rivals and no compromise. Pro-
gression therein connotes the toil and application of intense
perseverance, qualifications indispensable to success in
sublunary things, but how much more to advancement
in Universal Life.

Such are the West of England Mysteries of the Rosy
Cross, produced in the name of Thomas Vaughan by the
West of England centre and introducing in its theses such
anachronisms as Modern Spiritualism. I have‘mentioned
that it is a large MS., extending, as I found, to nearly
four hundred quarto pages, when submitted to my examina-
tion. It must be said that the one Grade which is delineated
piecemeal in the course of errant disquisitions compares
favourably with that of Zelator under the obedience of
the Soc. Ros. But, as there should be no need to specify, it
reflects practically nothing from the past of Rosicrucian
history, while—as it happens—here is nothing also in the
likeness of the Little foundation. Tue Srar in THE East
was by no means the sole excursion in the manufacture of
Rites and Grades. There is another less elaborate and less

580

-- Page 618 --
AA Modern Rosicrucian Order

curious invention, claiming to be translated from the French
but unquestionably of like production. It is concerned
with Judges in Israel and extends to Seven Degrees, but
it is no part of our concern. In view of yet other MSS., it
seems possible, however, that from this centre came also
the Warrants of another Secret Order or Association of
Occult Students to which there are occasional allusions
in the Transactions of the Soc. Ros. and which acquired
at a later period much undesirable notoriety in the public
press, owing to successive misfortunes. According to the
terminology of the period in circles dedicated to the
subjects, it was supposed to be “very occult” and all
allusion to membership, or even the fact of its existence,
was expressly prohibited. This notwithstanding, the
official organ in question is the first source of information
concerning it, as shewn by the summary references which
now follow.

(1) It appears by the Transactions that a copy of the
German Secret Symsots was exhibited at a Meeting of the
Soc. Ros. on October 11, 1888, as once in the possession
of the Rev. A. F. A. Woodford, described as “a very
learned Hermetist and member of a very ancient universal
Rosicrucian Society, composed of students of both sexes,
whose—sic, meaning the Society’s—English name even
is unknown, except to Members.” ‘The account proceeds
to specify that the ‘Hebrew title” was CHaBRaT
LeReCH AUR BOQR and that the sodality was known
otherwise as Hermetic Students of the G.D. It was
explained further that his association with this body
accounted for Woodford ignoring repeated requests to
join the Soc. Ros., “which he deemed a mere exoteric
institution.” (2) In the course of a lecture delivered
on July 5, 1894, it was stated that Eliphas Lévi’s supposed
“ Kabalistic Exhortation of Solomon to his Son Rehoboam”’
was the key to “a vast mass of information still studied

581

-- Page 619 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

by large Colleges of Rosicrucians, both on the Continent
and in England.” The Colleges in question were those
of the G.D., but they do not happen to have been
known under the scholastic title. (3) So far the Trans-
actions, but I do not claim to have exhausted all the
references. (4) The next point of information occurs
in the Hisrory or tHE Socreras Rosicructana, 1900,
which I have had occasion to cite at length. It is stated
that S. Liddell MacGregor Mathers, “in association with
Dr. Wynn Westcott and Dr. Woodman,” “ founded the
Isis-Urania Temple of the Hermetic Students of the
G. D.” (5) The date of this event is not given in the
History, but it appears in Dr. Westcott’s Data of 1916,
by which we learn (a) that “a Continental adept,” identi-
fied as S. D. A., authorised the formation of the Isis-
Urania Temple in 1887 ; (6) that the object was instruction
in medizval occult sciences ; (c) that the Chiefs were Fratres
M. E. V., then Supreme Magus of the Soc. Ros., S. A. and
S. R. M. D.; (@ that the third of this triad “ wrote the
Rituals in modern English,” deriving from oldR ..C .. MSS.
There is further information of consequence on cognate
matters and it can be materially extended at need, but for
the moment it lies outside the field of inquiry. The last
points are (a) that S. A. “ resigned from this Association in
1897,” and (b) that “‘the English Temples soon after fell
into abeyance,” which, however, was not the case.

It is a matter of common knowledge at this day that the
“ Association” thus referred to is the Hermetic Order
of the Golden Dawn, which in addition to a Neophyte
Grade conferred the following sequence, common to the
Soc. Ros. and the German Rite of 17773; (1) Zelator, (2)
Theoricus, (3) Practicus, (4) Philosophus, and—beyond
these—a certain sub-Grade, leading in Ritual directions
beyond the Golden Dawn.

It appears therefore on the surface that the “ very

582

-- Page 620 --
Seworrocec CUSC OX -a% ac
oe bcaxck—X]

Ju OSXeXojwe-X 9¢ 04.0 $y OFX
actercexxszwoH19@ Kort
3 ~Xcdbu REO OCOXR 4
zZeeosococa

RXZo% cuz

PAC % CAC)

eZcx% owe

XwGwewxs rowy «

Ax- OdIZXCRKCR ECW

9 7 axwesona

: uXWs + OZaA=ey,
> 9 BX for Boe
; $c YX OrecewEegn sec
1G © MichEcce Ozh S034
Ax XGREWEC “39E

' EwXc VW X20:
‘ QOXh wh weokt
‘ wh ocos we X$co
. @oddsoxy xnburkdo do

‘ 04090 Owe «
bouco k Ey
& eoXate k& nes

A ROSICRUC

pe 20jX WbhNCOWED WHICH
sc XceKC Asa WXE ‘
CM — ACKXoxeM Ne Tax
0€% ~AsoOECKR— Gwe y
vb ecacxox Wxeo -
oye yeoyh— acw Rckoxec

AH saHHKMOZD coeds
” _
COE WXFCHER vec FOU AWE -
DX wrx f01p05x .
K cludwrexy Xu seowac
w eck ccow-

S9-909 + ecexncx%= &cox-
OX S000

3 -
2 “ELC - 20% ¢ KECA%*C
OC> HEWx) -
> udsaige

X ~xQojce@c -
— aie XBece X99 ae XB *
boc XclwxX wd xu xrbot
eed .
BoXay de - >
partro— uckcorxeax &kacxee

IAN CIPHER

To face page 583

-- Page 621 --
A Modern Rosicructan Order

ancient universal Rosicrucian Society” started in 1887.
As regards its “vast mass of information,” the bulk of
this—and everything counted as of consequence—was
produced by the person whose identity is no longer veiled
by the letters S$. R. M.D. Finally, the lecturer who spoke
so mysteriously on October 11, 1888, was not only a member
of the Order but one of its Chiefs. There remains, however,
the reference to old Rosicrucian MSS., as the basis of
Rituals written “in modern English.” They are so-called
ciphers, or Ritual Summaries in a certain Magical Alphabet,
existing in several codices, the paper of some bearing
the water-mark of 1809, but so far from belonging to that
period—which, by the way, is one of reasonably modern
date—they refer to the Egyptian Riruat or THE Dean,
then unknown by name and undeciphered, much as the
Thomas Vaughan of another MS. referred to Modern
Spiritualism. Moreover, with one variation about which
the Ciphers are wrong, they contain an attribution of
Tarot Trumps Major to letters of the Hebrew Alphabet,
which they owe to Eliphas Lévi, subject, however, to the
fact that his attribution is also wrong.

There are several stories about these Ciphers when they
were—so to speak—on their travels—that they were picked
up on a book-barrow, and so forth. It is agreed generally
that they came into the possession of Woodford and that
they were decoded easily by the help of a book in the
British Museum. ‘The last statement at least is true. A
photographic reproduction of one page of the Ciphers,
made from a codex in possession of one of the earliest
members, faces this account, and J have selected that which
includes the reference to the Egyptian Funerary Ritual.
It calls to be added that the MS. contains words which had
not been incorporated into English dictionaries till after
1879. The first example of use in one case seems to be
Madame Blavatsky’s Ists Unveitep. My conclusion is

583

-- Page 622 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
that the Ciphers are post 1880, notwithstanding the faded
ink of certain originals. My information concerning one
codex referred it to the West of England, on which account
I have dwelt at considerable length upon the Rosicrucian
activities of that district. Moreover, THe Star Risinc in
tHE East teems with allusions which recall the Rituals of
the G.D., and its reference to the sepulchre of Jesus is
especially significant in this connection. But if these
things signify only a long sequence of curious coincidences,
and if G.D. ciphers did not originate somewhere at this
centre, then, alternatively, one of the codices may have
been found among the papers of Kenneth Mackenzie,
who died in 1886. They are replete with Tarot symbolism
of the inferior, magical kind, and we have Dr. Westcott’s
authority that Mackenzie claimed “ special knowledge ”
on this subject.
584

-- Page 623 --
CHAPTER XXII
A KABALISTIC ORDER OF THE ROSE-CROIX
Nort only are great subjects encircled, for the most part
by an external penumbra which, in comparison with them-
selves, is a region of trifles, but the subjects themselves,
when approached, not so much in an unserious spirit
as in the mood of the light mind, seem, under such auspices,
to abdicate their proper office and to manifest on their
fantastic side. They enter to this extent the region of
comedy, and as he must be a cross-grained poet who cannot
be diverted by the skilful parody of his own work, so it is
in no sense outside the law that the true mystic—who is
saved by many things, including a sense of humour—
should be the first perhaps to appreciate the motley appear-
ance of his own interests, when seen under the reflections
of travesty. From the days of Eugéne Sue and his epical
romances, and thenceforward to Zola, a long line of poets,
prophets, and makers of revelations have formulated and
expounded to us the greater mysteries of Paris, all of which
have gone as far as might be possible to shew that it is the
one city now situated in Europe wherein a man of parts
may take up his abode with every consideration for his
dignity. Of the lesser mysteries, some, at least, may be
supposed to reflect the same sentiment, or to intimate,
if you prefer it, the same polite lesson. ‘Their name,
however, is legion, and it is in their midst only that it is
possible for the man of parts to forget occasionally, and for
a period, that he is almost of necessity a Frenchman.
585

-- Page 624 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

When he has forgotten this, it is open for him to become
many things, but always to the exaltation of his honour,
and it will be a matter of astonishment with many persons
not actually its residents, who believe that they know their
Paris, including the Quartier Latin, to learn shortly what
ambitions and what aspirations have been cherished in
the hearts of certain Parisians, for something like forty
years past, and are still recapitulated silently when, catching
his reflection in the looking-glass, each of them says devoutly,
though not always audibly, adveniat regnum tuum |

We may take among the legion of these lesser mysteries
a single broad group, being modern developments of things
that belong to our subject. It has at least the advantage
of being curious and would deserve to rank as important
if its varied claims might be assumed to admit of verifica-
tion. The records of these mysteries exist in a literature
which, beyond its particular field, is even now little known
in Paris, and scarcely at all outside it, with the possible
exception of things which the Sar Péladan once dared to
certify as possible to French genius when offering to the
women of Paris his instructions on the art of becoming
a fairy—comment on devient fée—and to the men of that
gay capital his grave, if unserious, treatise on the best means
of becoming a magician—comment on devient mage. It
follows that the lesser mysteries of which I am speaking here
are otherwise occult mysteries, and here it is necessary to
distinguish. ‘That there is occultism in Paris, as in London
or New York, is known of course to the world; but as in
London it signifies in the eyes of the vain multitude an
interest in psychical research, a desire to investigate the
poltergeist and to believe in spiritism ; as in New York
it connotes a regard for trance oratory and a tendency to
accept mediumship for materialisations and the direct
voice ; so in Paris it means probably, for this same multitude,
if it means anything definitely, the investigations of Richet

586

-- Page 625 --
A Kabatistic Order of the Rose-Crotx
and Gely on the subject of ectoplasm ; a certain disposition
towards the doctrines of Allan Kardec, including reincarna-
tion as established by messages from the “ hither here-
after,” a certain leaning towards theosophical notions
modified by pantheism, not inelegantly expressed in modern
French and led in the direction of demonstration by the
less obtrusive phenomena of the “circle.” As to all of
these, they are lesser mysteries of Paris, of London, or
of New York, but specifically they are not those to
which reference is intended here. ‘The latter are not,
perhaps, fundamentally, more curious, and they are not,
perhaps, less insincere, within the horizon of the vain
multitude; but they are less obvious among the many
things which rank as mysteries, and they are less con-
spicuously diluted, though they are not without those
aids to reflection which are furnished by the conversazione,
the soirée, the séance tenue and the compte rendu. For the
man of parts is deliberate after his own fashion, even when
he has exchanged the Frenchman of his period for the
mystic citizen of an eternal kingdom, and has so, without
exactly designing it, ceased from being republican and
materialist.

It appears, from an analysis of the documents, that there
has been a choice of courses open to him and that among
these is the pursuit of alchemy, which has been long flourish-
ing in Paris, is not unknown at Lyons, and has been reported
at Bordeaux. The interest in this pursuit has been focussed
possibly by a handbook prepared for its disciples, containing
full instructions for becoming an alchemist—Comment on
devient Alchimiste. Mons. F. Jolivet Castelot is the writer
of this manual, and his predecessor in the same mystery
appears to have been Albert Poisson, who is termed the
Restorer of Alchemy. The work descends even to minute
particulars concerning the daily life of an alchemist, as this
may be lived in Paris and the environs, even in the matter

587

-- Page 626 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
of ablutions, so it may be thought tolerably complete ; yet
the further direction of students in the same subject has been
secured by founding an Alchemical Society of France, being
a section of the Faculty of Hermetic Sciences, a body
which once dispensed degrees, titles and the certificates
that are evidences of each—magnifiques diplémes—and
certain initiated authors prior to the Great War were not
afraid to add the words Docteur en Alchimie after their
name on a title-page. It is reported that the Alchemical
Society has a regular course of study and a decisive laboratory
practice. As regards the term of its labours it would seem
that “ gold has been furnished, but only in small quantities,
differing in this respect from that which is produced by the
Philosophical Stone,” because mere science can deal only
with those minima of which non curat lex magna of the old
adepts. In other words, Paracelsus and Raymund Lully
are masters still, while the man of parts, although he is a
Frenchman and has contrived to become an alchemist,
can reproduce their traditional achievements en petite quan-
tité seulement. But, as Mons. Jolivet Castelot explains, he
is for all that on the right road, on the road which leads to
ecstasy, “‘ that privilege of the adept.” And for his further
guidance there has existed, these many years past, a monthly
review under various titles, which may not contain the
proof positive of metallic transmutation as now performed
in France but is undeniable evidence of the extent to which
these lesser mysteries must be prosecuted in secret by
persons well acquainted with the terms, experiments and
development of modern chemistry, for it calls very often to
be classed as a highly technical periodical. Its latest
denomination is La Rosr-Crorx, and though in all its
chameleon changes it has been silent, I believe, on the
spiritual aspects of alchemy, there is no question that its
direction and its earnest subscribers generally would
regard it as dedicated to the time-immemorial object of
588

-- Page 627 --
A Kabalistic Order of the Rose-Croix
all Rosicrucian research. Outside these centralised and
perhaps vested interests of modern French alchemy, there
are traces also of isolated and more mysterious researches
which can be scarcely named here, but are at work in the
same direction, and it is not so long since an American
visitor to Paris was shewn the ‘‘menstrual water of alchemy,”
the dissolvent of all metals, in the form of a limpid fluid
having a slightly acid flavour. In such ways does one
section of la France spirituelle qualify, beyond the doctor-
ates of its Hermetic Faculties, for the mystic citizenship
of the eternal kingdom already mentioned, and I may
add that, in the mind of Mons. Jolivet Castelot, it seems
impossible for a right-thinking alchemist to be other than
monarchical in politics, while it is, further, a canon of
perfection that he should adhere to the dynasty of Orléans.

Here therefore is one aspect of the substituted Rosy Cross,
as it is understood and followed in France. It knows little
enough of the Brotherhood from which its name derives,
unless it be through Sédir and his rather slight mono-
graph; but it is following a practical, experimental research
and is not concerned with history.

Now, the occult sciences are, in the minds of their
disciples, all inter-connected ; it is impossible to pursue one
without becoming tinctured by another ; and thus he who
is, before all things, an alchemist, will, at least after a
secondary manner, be familiar with the heads of that
particular mystical tradition which, under the name of the
Kabalah, has been cherished both in East and West for
something like ten centuries upon the most moderate com-
putation, and from time immemorial according to the
opinion of its adepts. I have had little occasion—except
in connection with the Rose—to speak of it in this volume,
except by way of allusion, but I have established in other
books that on the Godward side it is a great theosophical
medley and in its degeneration a magical art. It originated

589

-- Page 628 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
among the Jews at some undetermined period of the
Christian dispensation, and it has a very large literature
in Jewry. When it first attracted attention among Christian
scholars in Europe, so many points of comparison seemed
possible between its philosophical portion and the chief
doctrines of Christianity, that it was regarded as an eirenicon
between the two religions, and it was held that Christianity
Kabalistically interpreted would ensure the conversion of all
Israel. Though we still—or some of us—have our missions
to the Jews, it would seem incredible at this day with what
fever of enthusiasm this false light was followed by many
learned and sincere persons who had no interests per se in any
transcendental philosophy and still less in any occult or
magical art. I must not say that no conversions took place
as the consequence of all this zeal misplaced, but the value
of the instrument was assuredly out of all proportion to the
machinery which was required for its manufacture, and it
fell into disuse accordingly. It was then that the Kabalah
passed over among the Christian scholars of Europe to that
use for which only a single phase of it was originally designed ;
it became part of the intellectual baggage of the occultist,
to whom its externals belong properly, and outside this
interest it ceased to concern any one. It entered into con-
nection with alchemy, probably in the seventeenth century,
and with other secret systems, including some of the
Masonic Rites, during the course of the eighteenth century ;
it fell asleep at the Napoleonic period, like all the connected
interests, and, so far as France was concerned, it awoke
in 1850, for the purely academical work of Adolphe Franck;
published a few years previously, scarcely calls for con-
sideration from this point of view. About 1885 it became
one of the leading interests of those lesser mysteries of
Paris with which we are here concerned, and is regarded as
one of the important depositaries of hidden truths which
have come down to us from antiquity, though its highest

59°

-- Page 629 --
A Kabalistic Order of the Rose-Croix
claims are missed rather than realised. Gérard Encausse,
otherwise Dr. Papus, who was a great light of these byways
prior to the War, has done what he could to simplify its
“ occult ” and magical side, and it was not at all necessary
for the man of parts in Paris who was disposed towards such
studies to embarrass himself by the study of Aramaic, in
which dialect the chief books of the Kabalah were originally
written, or even of Hebrew, for sufficient of their substance
was rendered into French, usually out of anterior Latin
versions, and it is never essential for this kind of scholar-
ship to go actually to the root of the matter.

When a day came for the vast midrash of the Zonar to
be put at full length into French outside occult circles, and
when they learned for the first time the import of true
Kabalism, a silence fell upon the circles, for their great
oracle was voided. It was not for consultations like theirs,
and I believe that to this day the translation is never
mentioned.

It must be confessed that the French occult Kabalist is,
for the most part, a dull person of preternatural gravity, and
the authors who once catered for him did not know their
subject. The alchemist of Paris was and is much to be
preferred before him, even though he can make gold en
petite quantité seulement, if actually at all; but his existence
made it possible to establish—as we are about to see—
a Kabalistic Order of the Rose-Cross, admission into which
being obtained with considerable difficulty was much prized
in consequence. And this Order did something to redeem
the dullness, for it elaborated—as one of its activities—a
system of occult man-hunting, and was very busy behind
its guarded vestibules in tracing to their doom the Black
Magicians of Paris, whose evil practices were counter-
acted by the higher arts of the Kabalistic Order. Here then
is a second and perhaps unexpected aspect of the Rosy
Cross in France, and its consideration brings us to the last

591

-- Page 630 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
class of those lesser mysteries with which I am concerned
here.

Though the alchemist in Paris may desire to make gold
possessing a commercial value, he is, ostensibly at least,
actuated by grander aims. He is in search of that mastery
of Nature which gives gold to the Alchemist, a familiar
spirit to the magicians, and the wisdom of the stellar
influences to the searcher of the starry heavens. The
pursuits of the occult Kabalist are of a still more lofty order,
for he is learned in the emanations of Deity and in the virtues
of those mysterious letters and numbers by which he believes
that all things were made originally, whether in heaven or
on earth. Or if he does not believe precisely, he is convinced
at least that his old masters in Kabalah were veiling great
mysteries in this strange symbolism. There might seem
some ground also for supposing that he is concerned after his
own manner in the conversion of that Israel which the
exponents of other mysteries, also located in Paris, would
extirpate if possible, even by fire and by sword. The
ground is that old books of the Latin-writing scholars who
tormented themselves with this subject, have been put
into French. But after reading a version of ADUMBRATIO
KaspaL@ Curistian&, first published in the seventeenth
century, wherein a Kabalist and a Christian philosopher
compare their respective tenets, one can imagine a man of
parts and a Frenchman excusing his indifference as an
evangelist only by a reasonable uncertainty whether it
would not serve as well if personally he became a Jew,
Christianity, in this curious tract, having converted itself
already into Kabalism, so that the Kabalist might turn
Christian.

But the lesser mysteries which produced all these high,
if occasionally stultifying ambitions, produced also the
revival of Black Magic, in which flippant Paris, so far as it
concerns itself with any, found much more for its entertain-

592

-- Page 631 --
A Kabatistic Order of the Rose-Croix
ment than in the Alchemical Society of France, though it
was patronised by Mons. Berthelot, or in the Kabalistic
Order of the Rose Cross, though it has been tolerated, in
the person of one of its chief spokesmen, by Mons. Adolphe
Franck.

The Black Magician does evil for the sake of evil, accord-
ing to the hypothesis which explains him, and in this he is
unlike the Jesuit, by the terms of another hypothesis.
The peculiar nature of his pursuits lead him to be more
occult and mysterious than either Kabalist or Alchemist,
though these also believe that there is wisdom in mystery.
The latter, however, pursue it largely for its own sake—
mystery for the sake of mystery—but the former of necess-
ity. That which he dares to attempt must, for his own
safety, remain hidden and obscure, since it is nothing
less than a league with the powers of evil. The reports
concerning such practices have passed into literature and
even into history, and though originally their actual basis
in fact may have been so thin as to be more than elusive,
they did not fail to act in a country like France much as
suggestion acts on a subject in the hypnotic state: in other
words, they created their object. As we heard of them in
the last decades of the nineteenth century, they offered
elements which are not to be found in old legends of the
Black Sabbath and in old records of sorcery. These were
a coarse and crass phantasmagoria produced upon a scale
which befitted the nature of the participants. Their
horrors were chiefly ridiculous—the peasant’s dream
exteriorised. But in later days the grace of literary skill
exercised itself upon the subject; the romantic writer
adorned it, as a Parisian who is a man of parts, for the
Parisians who were his brethren and were fitted to appreciate
exotics. In this way, a cultus diabolicus, a religion of the
evil principle, was invented, firstly on paper, and was put
subsequently into practice in those secret places where

2Q 593

-- Page 632 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

lesser mysteries of this kind can be celebrated. Into the
motives which prompted the frenzy on either side it is
unnecessary here to enter, but the worship of Lucifer was
based broadly on the presumption that in place of the
Satan of Milton, he is a tolerant combination of the Satyr
and Silenus, under whose rule the Decalogue is abolished.
It is perhaps manifestly unfair towards the occult circles
of Paris to include this kind of aberration among the number
of their pursuits, as if it were recognised and professed,
but it is in evidence after its own manner, it comes out of
the occult past, and the pathological consequences which
are supposed to result therefrom are of the kind which were
said to follow the Black Magic of the past ; what has been
done is to civilise the process. Moreover, evocations,
divinations, and all the hundred and one rites of White
Magic have abounded in the same city; secret and other
societies existed and exist to practise them; they had and
they have still their weekly journals as well as their monthly
reviews. To any one unconversant with such matters,
they must sound incredible enough, and yet they are a very
small parcel only of the whole truth. Materialism, the
anti-clerical movement and liberty as it is interpreted by the
Republic, have produced more wonders than all phenomena
of faith ; and the expatriated Religious Orders might smile
at that which has come into possession after them.

Now, this is a third aspect of things which encompass
the idea of the Rosy Cross in Paris, but the Cross has
been defiled and the Rose is black. It is not only “ the
flesh in rebellion against the spirit,” but in revolt against
Nature itself. I do not propose to specify its records
in books, but the books exist, though now withdrawn
from circulation. Whether the circles and their orgies are
still maintained I do not know: many things died in the
War, and these—it is to be hoped—among them.

Of such are the lesser mysteries of Paris. They do not

594

-- Page 633 --
A Kabalistic Order of the Rose-Croix
appear on the surface, at least officiously, though they ware
not unknown in salons, and occasionally some episode of the
moment gives them a moment’s vogue. It remains to say
that, with their connections and derivations innumerable,
they all issued from or were revived by that one epoch-
making apostle of the “occult” sciences who began writing
about the year 1850, using truly a pen of magic, under the
name, already mentioned, of Eliphas Lévi. In spite of his
pseudonym and of the fact that he was a Kabalist among
other things, he was not a Jew, but actually a brilliant and
unfortunate Abbé, who lost his clerical position and turned
to the secret sciences, possibly in search of consolation,
possibly as a part of his doom, or, in the opinion of the
censorious, for more material reasons. The explanation
matters nothing; vous savez qu il faut vivre, and the
important fact is that this personage, equally in England
—where he is now well known—and in France, has created
what is termed generally the occult movement. Without
him, it would be impossible to write on these lesser mysteries,
for to speak in the language of the occultist, they would only
have existed negatively. Assuredly there are more things in
Paris than are dreamed of in the philosophy of its normal
visitors, whether from England or America, or further across
the seas.

The purpose so far in this chapter has been to indicate
what has passed as belonging to the Rosicrucian subject
in the mind of modern France; but I have yet to deal
with the attempt, so far barely signalised, to establish a
working Order of the Rosy Cross. We shall find that it owed
nothing to the past, even by claim, and the explanation is
that Parisian occultism cares little for the past in history.
We have seen that there are bibliographical legends of the
Fama Fraternitatis and Cuemican Nvptiats being
translated into French at a very early period and in the
case of the latter—according to one report—about or

595

-- Page 634 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
before the time that it appears to have been written. So
far as evidence goes there is no truth in any of these legends.
For some unaccountable reason the claims and traditional
history of the Rosy Cross did not appeal to French occult
imagination, and there is no trace of any House of the Holy
Spirit having been built in France, not even in the heart,
though the Eighteenth Degree had its Sovereign Chapters
and conferred its rank of chivalry. From 1860 and
onwards—as we have just seen—Eliphas Lévi, in several
brilliant writings, clothed his imagined “ occult sciences ”
in a new vesture and gave them a new philosophical setting ;
but even in his Hisrorre pz 1a Maciz it is curious to note
how few and far between are his references to the German
Order and how utterly wanting he is in all knowledge of
the subject. Neither before nor after his period has any
manifesto of the Rosy Cross ever been published in French,
though one would have thought that a decorative romance
like the Cuemicat Nuptiauzs could have hardly escaped this
honour. The great revival of 1885, at the head of which
was Dr. Papus, brought with it a certain sentimental feeling
of concern in the subject, but it was little more than in-
stinctive. J remember Papus in a mood of prophecy affirm-
ing that the whole secret mystery of the Rosy Cross would
be unfolded within a given number of years—how many I
forget—but their limit has been passéd long since in the
flight of historical time, and the Elias of this revelation is
still to come.

Some years prior to this suggestive advertisement and
actually in or before 1889 an Orpre KaBBALISTIQUE DE LA
Rosr-Crorx was founded at Paris by the Marquis Stanislas
de Guaita, whose literary life began with exotic verse—
Fieurs pu Mat—and who ultimately closed his career at
comparatively an early age, fortified by the last Rites of the
Holy Roman Church. Between these events he became
famous in France by the issue of monumental works on

596

-- Page 635 --
A Kabalistic Order of the Rose-Croix
occult subjects and especially on Magic. La Cier DE LA
Macre Norrr is an important case in point, but there were
several other volumes, all speaking with authority and
accepted in France at the face value of their personal claim,
yet a little pretentious in manner, as the claim exhibits,
and not a little inaccurate on points of fact, as is common, if
not inevitable, with French occultists. De Guaita was
President ad vitam of that which he had established until
his death on December 19, 1897, when he was succeeded by
F. C. Barlet, who apparently resigned and his place was
taken by Dr. Gérard Encausse, otherwise Papus. The
President was assisted by a Council of T'welve—six, as
we are told, known and six unknown, Philosophes Inconnus,
I presume, in memory of Saint-Martin and perhaps of that
mysterious association the Laws of which were published by
Baron Tschoudy. Papus was a member ab origine and so
also was the fantastic celebrity Sar Péladan. He was in
fact one of the Council till the early part of 1890, when he
severed connection, finding it intolerable, I believe, to be
second, or in any minor part whatsoever, even in an occult
Rome. He did more, however, than this, for he created
a newer Orpre ve LA Ross-Crorx, which was also an Order
of the Temple and of the Holy Graal. It was characterised
otherwise and especially as a Catholic Rose-Croix, for I
believe that Sar Péladan—like the fairies of Bisnop Corbet—
amidst all his vagaries, was and remained of “the old
religion.” It is said that in 1899 there was a proposal to
amalgamate the two bodies, but it came to nothing, as might
be expected. Whether the junior creation deserved to be
called a body in any organised sense remains doubtful,
but whether it was Rosicrucian at all in the sense which
attaches to the term is, past all question, to be decided in
the negative. I remember that its originator once issued a
book under the title of QuETE pu SainT GRAAL ; it contained
nothing about the Sacred Vessel or anything related thereto,
597

-- Page 636 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
but—as the author confessed naively—it secured the title
to himself, forgetting perchance or ignoring the Chronicle
of Galahad. The Quest, in a word, was Péladan. So also, I
conceive, when he founded his new Order, Sar Péladan was
the Rose-Croix. It was his portrait in any position, his
views on occult subjects, his last book or any other. It was
CoMMENT ON DEVIENT Fe and perhaps above all it was
ComMENT ON DEVIENT Mace, but it was he, his and of all else
nothing. When, therefore, L’Orpre Kasga.isTIQUE pro-
posed to amalgamate with his Rose-Croix it proposed to
amalgamate with Sar Péladan or—in other words—invite
him back to the fold. And the scheme fell through.

Two things remain to be said on the external side: (1)
That in 1910, according to Sédir, the Kabalistic Order had
deviated from its original character, but we know and have
seen that there were precedents for this in the past; (2)
That when the institution lost its third Grand Master towards
the close of the War it seems to have dissolved entirely.
Other occult societies of the immediate preceding past
have been restored in whole or in part, but this is heard of
no longer. As regards the characteristics from which it
fell away, I have no means of knowing ; but in L’I niT1aTI0n
for 1907—being the President or Grand Master’s monthly
magazine—there appeared a statement on Rosicrucian
Hopes by Dr. Fulgence Bruni, who, I conceive, knew
something at first hand concerning L’Orpre KaspaLisTIQue.
The heads of his discourse follow. (1) The ignorant
fanatic, who believes and does not know, is vanquished by the
Kabalah, grafting itself on each branch of philosophical
evolution. (2) After the great Fall there remained in the
human breast a feeble spark of uncreated fire, like a vague
remembrance of celestial spheres, and in hours of repose
and liberation it makes war upon our lower instincts. (3)
The Great Work is the redemption of man, bent under the
yoke of evil and superstition. (4) The truly initiated priest-

598

-- Page 637 --
A Kabalistic Order of the Rose-Croix
hood cannot be separated from the work of artists, art
being the cultus of beauty. (5) Love is the eldest Son of the
Absolute. (6) The three degrees of initiation are Purifica-
tion, Illumination, Union. (7) The luminous resurrection
of the Rose pf Croix is mentioned at the end and is under-
stood as “a most exalted Order of veritable western
initiates,” depositaries of Kabalistic tradition. The proof
is that the mere name of its Chief offers a complete guaran-
tee, “the superiority of Papus ” being known throughout
the world. The final peroration affirms as follows: “ Sons
of light and love, the Rose pt Croix destroy everywhere the
efforts of obscurantists and the wicked. They are at once
iconoclasts and architects. Silent and unknown. . . they
seek no other recompense than the “lawful satisfaction of
accomplished duty.” Rough designations are not as a rule
politic, but the proper definition of diatribe like this is
rant. If it stood for a predominant sentiment within the
confraternity, we can understand the finding of Sédir, who
was probably himself a member.

As regards interior constitution, we learn on more sober
authority, which shall stand, however, at its value, owing
to the first clauses: (1) That between 1880 and 1887 the
“initiates ” had cause to bestir themselves because foreign
societies were seeking to strip France and transfer the
direction of European occultism to London (2) That
they may have designed even to annihilate the work of true
masters in the West. (3) That a reforming movement
began in France and was carried to a good term by Stanislas
de Guaita. (4) That L’Orpre KappaistIQuE DE LA Rosg-
Croix “‘ emerged from the darkness.” (5) That it comprised
three Grades, or baccalaureate, licentiate and doctorate in

1 The reference is probably to the Theosophical Society, established at
this period in London. It is to be noted that Papus joined the Paris
branch early in his career, but came into opposition thereto and left it
with embittered feelings.

599

-- Page 638 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
Kabalah—attainable by examination. (6) That de Guaita
was Grand Master and administered the Order, aided by
a Council consisting of three Chambers. (7) That he pro-
posed a threefold task, being study of the classics of the
occult, effort to establish spiritual communion with Divine
Unity, and propaganda These being the original
“ characteristics,” it is to be noted on our own part: (1)
That the foundations made no appeal to the past and no
claim thereon in respect of descent. (2) That the
adopted designation was purely fantastic or conventional in
respect of the words Rose-Croix. (3) That it did not work
in Ritual after the manner pursued by the Reformation of
1777, or after any manner. (4) That by intention it was
primarily and above alla learned Faculty, which applied tests
of knowledge and granted diplomas. (5) That it planned the
formation of what may be called an Inner Circle for certain
experiments or practices which on the surface seem mystical,
but in view of the Grand Master’s pursuits it is impossible
to specify what he understood by “ spiritual communion
with Divine Unity.” The followers of so-called theurgic
paths used language of this kind from time to time.

* Maurice Barrés: Un Renovateur vE w’Occuntisme: Stanislas de
Guaita (1861-98). Paris, 1898.
600

-- Page 639 --
CHAPTER XXIII

THE AMERICAN ROSY CROSS
Tue story of this chapter begins in Germany, and it may
be mentioned in the first place that there is a considerable
literature of the subject, though to all intents and pur-
poses it is unknown among us. As a part of American
history it has grown up there and thereunto belongs. ‘The
early memorials are concerned, among many personalities,
with Johannes Kelpius, who was born in the vicinity of
Denndorf, probably at Halwegen, anno 1673, and was son
of a pastor named George Kelp. After the death of his
father in 1685 Johannes was sent to Altdorf, near Niirem-
berg in Bavaria, to continue and complete his education at
the University of that town. In 1689, or at the age of six-
teen, he became a Doctor of Philosophy and the Liberal
Arts, the thesis which earned this title being on Natural
Theology.1 In the course of his scholastic career he made
acquaintance with Baron Knorr von Rosenroth, the author
of Kassara Deunpata and a famous theosophist of his
period. It is a matter of speculation only, but the reason-
able inference is that Kelpius owed to Rosenroth the
beginning of those dedications which characterised his
subsequent life.

Kelpius became also a friend of his tutor, D. Johannes
Fabricius of Altdorf and Helmstadt, and seems to have
been in bonds of intimacy with Johann Jacob Zimmerman,

1 The authority is Sievert’s NacnricHTeN, von S1f£zENBURGISCHEN
GELEHRTEN UND IHREN SCHRIFTEN, 1785, but I know it only through J. F.
Sachse : Tue German Pietists or ProvinciaL PennsyLvania, 1895, who is
also my chief source of reference in respect of Kelpius.

6o1

-- Page 640 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

a mathematician and astronomer of European distinction,
who in one notable respect became the guiding star of his
destiny. Zimmerman is said also to have been skilled in
astrology and geomancy, not to speak of theological know-
ledge presupposed in the pastor of a Lutheran Church in
Wirtemberg. In 1684 he lost his ecclesiastical position
owing to his expressed views on a coming millennium and
subsequently the chair of mathematics at Heidelberg on
account of other ‘ mystical speculations” described as
deeper. He has been characterised by Brecklingius as a
magician, Kabalist and partisan of Jacob Béhme.? It
follows that when Kelpius made his acquaintance in the
vicinity of Niiremberg, Zimmerman was under a cloud in
the worldly sense, and at one period acted as proof-corrector
to a Hamburg publisher of “ mystical and theosophical
works,” in which manner he became familiar with persons
whose enthusiasms were similar to his own. They seem to
be enumerated indifferently as Pietists, Mystics, Chiliasts,?
Rosicrucians and Illuminati. It was the day of Collegia
Pietatis, reminiscent remotely of Tauler and his Friends of
God, of Chapters of Perfection, the keynote of which was
a deeper sense of personal religion, but they were in bonds
of union with many kinds of extravagance, from the pursuit
of physical alchemy to Second Advent zealotry. Except
for its anti-papal spirit, of which there is no vestige in the
memorials before me, the chief text-book of all might well
have been Studion’s Naometria.?

1 One of his published works demonstrated the truth of the Copernican
system from Holy Scripture.

It is curious that this fantastic designation should have been perpetuated
from the days of Andree—see Mrmoriatia, 1619—apparently to those of
Kelpius.

® As Studion predicted the crucifixion of the Sovereign Pontiff on an
all too definite date, so Zimmerman foretold “ the exact time ” of a coming
millennium by the help of “ astronomical observations.” This fatal facility
in computation seems to have been more obnoxious to Church and State than
his divergences on doctrinal subjects.

602

-- Page 641 --
The American Rosy Cross

The mental and spiritual environment which encom-
passed Kelpius in Bavaria was analogous in all respects to
that of Wiirtemberg at the close of the sixteenth century
and throughout the first epoch of the Rosy Cross. The
Lutheran Church and its recognised competitors in the
common mesh of particular vested interests, having manu-
factured their respective titles of working orthodoxy,
followed the gentle art of persecution and hounding: if
torture and burning had passed out of fashion as the Holy
Roman Rite fell into comparative desuetude, there was
hardness enough in yokes that were still imposed, and
heavy enough were the burdens on those who dared to differ.
It was far indeed to the day of liberation in Germany and
far to the reign of tolerance. Zimmerman “ denounced
the Established Church as a Babel” and cast doubts on
the Augsbourg Confession.1 He proceeded to Erfurth
and there established—circa 1690—a Chapter of Perfec-
tion, presumably within the bosom of a Collegium Pietatis
antecedently existing at that active centre. Its personalities
included Daniel Falkner, an university licentiate; A. H.
Francke, a Deacon; and Anna Maria Schuckart, an
ecstatic, who was called the Erfurth Prophetess. This
Collegium was suppressed and the Chapter decided on
departing from the German “ Babylon” and seeking the
“American Plantations ””—so called in a contemporary
account?—-under the guidance of the Divine Spirit.

There is ground for inferrmg that the Chapter was
founded with this interest at heart and Zimmerman stood
at its head, the controlling and inspiring spirit, the Magister
of the work in hand, Kelpius being second in command
or influence. There was also Heinrich Bernard Késter,

1 See Zimmerman’s Munpus Copzrnizans, 1684.

2 T refer to a State pamphlet of this period, issued in 1708 under the
title of CaroLtus WirremperciscHe, Unschuld Act, and quoted at length
by J. F. Sachse.

603

-- Page 642 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
described as throughout a champion of “the orthodox
Lutheran faith” but imbued with “ mystical doctrines
and Rosicrucian speculations,” which led him to join
another Collegium Pietatis when at Berlin and afterwards
to promote the emigration scheme of the Erfurt Chapter.
The companions of that which for them and in their day
was a great and perilous venture were some forty-seven in
all, according to the Diary of Kelpius, and from two rally-
ing points—being Magdeburg and Halberstadt, they made
a beginning of their pilgrimage, joining forces at Rotter-
dam. This was in 1693, and there—on the eve of embarka-
tion for England—Zimmerman died. We know little of
the delays which followed, but the party were in London!
on February 7th, 1694, when Magister Kelpius, now in
supreme command, chartered the “Sarah Maria,” under
Captain John Tanner, and the voyage down Thames began
on February 14th. The events and perils which followed
are pictured at full length in the Kelpius Diary,? but they
do not concern us here. It shall be sufficient for my pur-
pose to say that the “Sarah Maria”—of good hope, as
Kelpius called her—was “ made fast to the public wharf
of Philadelphia ” on June 23rd, 1694.

Before speaking briefly of that life which awaited the
pilgrims in their new land and home, the question arises
as to how and why they and their leader or master have
come to concern us at all in connection with the Rosy
Cross. We have seen that they have been labelled Rosi-
crucians, as alternative to Illuminati and Chiliasts, but the
term seems used in that old fluidic, inexact or arbitrary

1 It is said that while in London the leaders of the expedition made
acquaintance with the Philadelphian Society, under Dr. Pordage and Jane
Lead. There was even a surface disposition on the part of the English
pletists to join forces with the Chapter of Perfection, but it came to nothing.

2 See Tue Drarrum or Macisrer Jouannes Kexpius, with Annotations
by Julius Friedrich Sachse. Published by the Pennsylvania-German
Society, Lancaster, Pa., IQl7.

604

-- Page 643 --
Figura clin: Theg by cab REC
SEB ED
Deus Triunus APs 2)\ exlentrownr
exitivtt abe eh Nn.
Balle nach so Malone iO 1a web ada Tore
¢ ae .
Nntiy sre AN Suse be .
Wie VARA p oe saat nd ge. ia
Shieh AS) y\ college
gga Sige 3 SS Nees, Ls freer.
‘oe bifess 40/9 Re ¢
{atura, ones alle fi re Guin Batram
is BS Se
bet SL et SSS Siu ine ieee
ea @) AA Jie
ee | ee sant a ne her
REESE | ek amy Gatto erm Sas FES
wamene [COX oh. tlw ea biti
rum binidew a ae : ‘pai a
mr CE B® iG ie:
Gone Bl AF BY”), 3 Re
total RY Be CDE SE) Sa Een
e  \teee eke
° es = an ws
THEOSOPHIA ROSICRUCIANA
To face page 604

-- Page 644 --
The American Rosy Cross
sense which we have met with on many occasions. Were
they or any of them actually initiated Brethren of an Order
which in the year 1694 seems to have been otherwise asleep,
like Christian Rosy Cross in his vaulted sepulchre? Mr.
J. F. Sachse, who was an-heir by birth of the pilgrims, had
many treasures as such in the muniment room of his family
and acquired many more by research in the four quarters,
affirms that in a certain retired valley at Ephrata in Pennsyl-
vania, on the banks of the flowing brook, “ the Secret Rites
and Mysteries of the true Rosicrucian Philosophy flourished
unmolested for years.” He says also of those who practised
them that they were a true theosophical or Rosicrucian
community, ‘‘ whose tenets were founded upon the dogmas
of the Kabalah and esoteric philosophy.” But all this, on
the surface at least, looks like poetic imagery, and is used,
moreover, by one who neither knows nor professes know-
ledge concerning the Order, except in a very casual sense.
Because certain people of the early seventeenth century
who might have been called Pietists—had such a denomina-
tion existed—were among witnesses to an incorporated
Order of the Rosy Cross, it seems counted tolerable to call
the historical Pietists of 1694 the Rosicrucians of their own
day. Now, if this is how the case stands, Magister Kelpius
and his fellow-pilgrims have no place in the present volume.
It happens, however, that there is another side of the
question and that although the designation is a loose and
inaccurate label of the Chapter of Perfection at large—
like that of Illuminati, which was not current at the period
—and although there is no real evidence that its members
practised any Rites or Mysteries which can be called Rosi-
crucian in complexion, it seems colourable that a few among
them, or—let us say—Kelpius at least, were after some
manner integrated in the Order and may have communi-
cated that which was theirs to all or many of the pilgrims.
The reason is that they are said to have carried with them,
605

-- Page 645 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

and to have followed, the rule of a priceless Rosicrucian MS.
In the account of Sachse and in the illustrations which ac-
company it there may be nothing to show that this docu-
ment answers conclusively to its technical description: it
might be mainly theosophical or pietistic in character. As
a fact, however, it represents an early stage of the Srcrer
Symsoxs, published at Altona in 1785-8, analysed in my
sixteenth chapter and utilised for many illustrations of the
present work.1 Historically and bibliographically it is there-
fore of the first importance, as apparently a real Rosicrucian
text and seeming to indicate (1) that the German Rosy
Cross in the hiddenness of the late seventeenth century
was that Christian Theosophical Order which Fludd repre-
sented it to be in his earlier day, indeed ab origine symbolt,
and (2) that the Altona circle did not produce an invention
on their own part nearly one hundred years later but had
developed and extended only. .

There is one possible consideration which militates against
this view and must be left to stand at its value (1) because
of the inadequate account which J. F. Sachse has be-
queathed of his literary treasure, outside the photographic
reproduction of four leaves ; (2) because he is no longer with
us in earthly life ; and (3) because it is understood that his
heirs decline to produce it for inspection. The considera-
tion is that if the thirty pages or leaves of the Kelpius MS.
are as suggested in my note pages containing symbols, then
the illustrations of Geazrme Ficuren may be almost re-
duced to this number by subtracting peculiarly Rosicrucian

1 Mr. Sachse describes the “ ancient manuscript ” as an heirloom in his
family, the only “‘ perfect copy ” extant, so far as is known, a folio measuring
12x18 inches, consisting of “thirty pages exquisitely written and em-
bellished with illuminated symbols.” As an inference from a photographic
reproduction facing his p. 10, it might be suggested that the ancient manu-
script has no letterpress except that which is grouped about the designs ;
that Grntime Ficuren is approximately of the same size; and that it is
extended to 57 pp. by the help of Avreum Szcurum Repivivum, Aureus
‘Tracratus, a purely alchemical preface, a forc-title and a few extra designs,

606

-- Page 646 --
The American Rosy Cross

designs and designs accompanying the alchemical texts
reprinted in the work. I submit that this is arbitrary on
the surface, though it is not inconceivable that the bulk of
the plates in the Altona publication could have been taken
over from an antecedent work which was not Rosicrucian
at all. There is, however, one piece of direct evidence. The
Golden and Rosy Cross which appears on the title-page of
GEHEIME Ficuren is wanting in that of the Kelpius MS.,1
and so also are Rosicrucian references throughout its
letterpress.

Moreover, although Sachse almost invariably refers to his
manuscript as Rosicrucian only,? and in so doing one would
think that he might, or must have, been guided by some-
thing evidential therein, we must rémember that in 1888,
or seven years prior to THe German Pretists or PENNsYL-
vaniA, Dr. Franz Hartmann had published at Boston his
dismembered edition of THe Secret Symzous; that it is
quoted on one occasion by Sachse ;? and that as he was

1 It reads as follows: Putstca, Mrrapnisica rT Hyrrrpuisica. D.O.M.A.
Deo Omnipotenti sit Laus, Honos et Gloria in Seculorum Secula, Amen. Ein-
faltig A.B.C. Biichel, fair junge Schuler, so sich fletssig tiben im der Schule des
Heiligen Geistes, ganz einfaltig Bildnissweise fiir Augen gemablet, zum Neuen
Fabres Exercitio in dem Naturlichen und Theologischen Lichte. Compare the
crowded sub-title of Genrerme Ficurzn, describing it as also an ABC
Booklet for young pupils in the same School, much as we have seen that
cryptic texts of alchemy are termed Ludus Puerorum or Opus Mulierum.

2 On two occasions he calls it a Theosophical MS., and one of his photo-
graphic reproductions is termed “‘a page of Rosicrucian Theosophy.” The
"Theosophy was Rosicrucian in his view, and the Rosy Cross was for him a
Tueosopuia at large.

3 See annotation on p. 37 of THe German Pretists, giving an extract
from Hartmann’s publication, which is described under the name of Cos-
mMoLocy and nothing more. Hartmann altered the title of the Altona
work, calling it CosmoLocy; or, UNIversat ScIENCE .. ., containing the
Mysteries of the Universe... , explained according to the Religion of Christ,
by means of the Secret Symbols of the Rosicrucians of the Sixteenth and Seven-
teenth Centuries. Sachse has described his MS. as the only perfect one known,
which statement seems obviously untrue in the light of the Altona folio.
About this publication Sachse did not know, and in what must be called a
disingenuous manner he gives no account of Hartmann’s, its illustrations or

607

-- Page 647 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
not a very critical person his use of the term Rosicrucian
may be a mere reflection from that work. All this is likely
enough, but after full reflection on the confused issues I
question whether we can hold a decided view. I cannot
make up a full thirty designs in Tue Secret Symzots
without including some that are partly Rosicrucian, and
with scarcely a single exception—pietistic, theosophic or
cosmological—they are all alchemical. But that which
weighs with me most is the fact that if Kelpius carried a
text of the Rosy Cross and belonged to that Order I can
understand tolerably what is otherwise past comprehension
in a Lutheran community, namely, that the Philadelphian
pilgrims—as Sachse and his sources shew—were pledged
to celibacy, like the early traditional Brethren, of whom it
is said that they were “ all bachelors and of vowed virginity.”

I cannot help thinking that this is an important point,
and here I must leave the debate. Unless and until my
tentative disposition calls to be revised by a fuller acquaint-
ance with the Sachse M&., it is at least possible that there
are grounds therein for the use of that descriptive term
which he applies so often.

I pass on to sketch briefly that which befell the pilgrims
in the Quaker Province of Philadelphia. They reached the
German settlement now called Germantown and there
established themselves on the banks of the Wissahickon,
Magister Kelpius taking up his abode in a cave among the
rocks of the hillside. The object of all was “to live apart
from the vices and temptations of the world ” and thus be
real purport. But he could not fail to see that his precious heirloom was
less or more facing him in public print. It may be added that the order of
the plates differs in the Altona work and the Sachse MS. That which is
numbered 3 in Puisica, Meraruisica er Hyperpuisica occupies leaf 35 of
Genettme Ficuren, No. 7 answers to 26, and 24 to 32. Moreover, those
words which constitute the title in chief of the Kelpius document are
omitted in the other case, but are found later on in leaf 35, while they are
absent from the corresponding plate, No. 3 of the earlier text.

608

-- Page 648 --
The American Rosy Cross

prepared for expected revelations “in the silence and soli-
tude of the wilderness.” The isolation was not complete,
for they had also a mission in teaching and religious services
were held. Kelpius on his own part strove to unite the
German sects of Pennsylvania in one Christian Church, and
there was zeal also for the conversion of Indian tribes.
According to Sachse, the pilgrims lived in their virgin forest
of the New World “ for a period of at least ten years, a
strictly Theosophical Fraternity, whose tenets were founded
upon the dogmas of the Kabalah and esoteric philosophy.”
In the outer world they were called “The Woman in the
Wilderness.” It was not, however, a period of unbroken
harmony, for the presence of a strict Lutheran element
did not work in that direction and the pledge of celibacy
led to several separations. When Kelpius himself died of
consumption in 1708 at the early age of thirty-five it is
said that “‘ such of the brethren as were left of the original
community performed the last rites according to the
impressive ritual of the Mystic Fraternity.” It follows
that the Master saw the decline of his Company; the
communal life came gradually to an end; the solitude was
colonised by settlers; and the remnant “‘ followed each
other to the shades of death.”

I have searched in vain for traces of the alleged Kabalism
in the tenets of the so-called Chapter and for any charac-
teristic Rosicrucian vestiges in the letters of Kelpius. The
emigration to the New World was in search of a place of
peace and contemplation in view of the coming Millennium,
“‘which, according to Zimmerman’s astronomical calcu-
lations, was to take place in the fall of the year of grace,
1694.” The pilgrims find therefore their natural place in
the succession of German Second Adventists whose fore-
casts were as false as Studion’s. Kelpius and the more
advanced members are affirmed to have studied Hermetic
Arts, not, however, in search of metallic transmutation but

2R 609

-- Page 649 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

rather the Elixir of Life, “ to provide remedies and prepara-
tions for the alleviation of human suffering.” They cast
horoscopes also, used the Divining Rod, and prepared
astrological amulets or talismans—to be worn upon the
person. It is said further that they “scouted the idea of
physical death,’ and Kelpius above all believed almost to
the end that he would be transfigured like Elijah and
“translated bodily into the spiritual world.” We can see
now where we stand, that is to say, in the presence of a
group of religious and occult enthusiasts who may have
carried a Rosicrucian MS. and some of whom may have
belonged to the Order in one of its circles, but their real
location is in Mititia Crucirera Evancezica and not in
the Collegium Mysttcum of him who, according to Vaughan,
was called Sapiens by earlier Brothers of the Rosy Cross.

On the faith of available testimonies I have now dealt
with what may have been the advent of a German Rosi-
crucian Chapter into the United States. The evidence is
faulty enough, but if such it was we must recognise that
it stands alone, and we have now to glance briefly at things
which have paraded in the name but have in all cases
assumed it without a warrant and have sometimes supported
their pretence by imposture and mendacity. The credulity
of the American mind on this subject is comparable to that
of England over other occult claims.

As I have not taken all imposture for my province, I am
not in a position to affirm that Paschal Beverley Randolph
produced the first putative Order of the Rosy Cross in
America, but I have failed to trace anything anterior to his
date, and he will answer as the first witness in a line of
occult adventurers who are typically characteristic of their
place and circumstances. It should be understood that in
the account which follows I have set aside entirely all
references to Rose~Croix Masonry as exceeding my present
province. There is a Southern Jurisdiction of the Scottish

610

-- Page 650 --
The American Rosy Cross

Rite, having its headquarters at Charleston, and there is also
a Northern Jurisdiction seated at Chicago, both of them
working Thirty-three Degrees which are identical in name
and purport. The Eighteenth in each case is that of Rose-
Croix, as it was in the old days of that French Rite of
Perfection which has been mentioned at some length in my
fifteenth chapter. To make use of Masonic terminology,
T believe that-both have been philosophised : this at least
is the case assuredly respecting the Ritual of the Southern
Jurisdiction, once ruled by the famous Albert Pike. The
designation signifies that the original Christian elements
have been removed—wholly or in part—and it follows that
from my point of view the validity of the Grade has been
destroyed. It offers no longer the Lost Word of the Craft
Degrees restored in the light of Christ, but such a sub-
stitution as is represented by the Hermetic formula—Icnr
NATURA RENOVATUR INTEGRA—in place of Jesus Nazara-
zeus Rex Jupm#orum. However this may be, the two
Grand Obediences constitute together the authentic
Scottish Rite in the American Republic, and this not only
by the hypothesis of their claim, but in virtue of general
recognition and the success of an accomplished fact. It is
desirable to mention this because it happens that there are
other claimants, who also work and administer the Grade of
Rose-Croix, under I know not what warrants and apparently
in various forms. There seems in any case no evidence to
indicate that they or any of them represent the Rite of
Perfection or preserve the Christian elements. Like the
orthodox Scottish Jurisdictions, they do not enter there-
fore into an historical consideration of the Rosy Cross in
America.

I have spoken of putative Orders and false witnesses,
with Randolph and his fantastic association standing at
the head of both as equally “ false in sentiment and fictitious
in story.” My readers shall judge, however, on their own

611

-- Page 651 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

part, for the case is characterised by several conflicting
elements, and the Randolph dossier is not entirely that of
a vagrant travelling in occult arts. In respect of deception
there is no question that he was his own and his first victim
if he thought that his views and lucubrations might stand
for authentic Rosicrucian teachings. But in a judgment
which makes for justice it must be added that he revoked
his own claim on a vast antiquity. He was also a man of
enthusiasm and of great personal zeal. It is said finally
that he was a seer from childhood, like his mother before
him, and that he had passed through the horrors of medium-
ship, as he describes them, adding that he turned with
loathing from the bare recollection of conditions implied
thereby. He was further what is called in America a
“half-breed ”” and he entered this life in consequence
with something approaching a stigma in America at that
time. The fact was likely to react on a highly psychic
nature, and there is evidence that it did. The dual disability
may help to account for the peculiar cast of his dedica-
tions in the life that he led, the books that he produced,
perhaps even for his ultimate end.

It does not appear that in the matter of the Rosy Cross he
did more than give a fresh circulation to some of the old
reveries, to the extent that he was acquainted with these
by common report and otherwise. It appears to have
been presented mainly as of Essenian origin, though it must
be acknowledged that there were other fantasies. In other
and more hectic stories he paraded flaming accounts of
the Brotherhood, its immemorial antiquity, its diffusion
throughout the world, with suggestions that its ramifica-
tions extended to unseen spheres. In perhaps the worst of
these performances—a thing called Ravaterts—he affirmed
the existence of American Lodges, working under a Grand
Charter granted by a Third Temple of the Order which
dated from Atlantis; but the particulars are banal, and

612

-- Page 652 --
The American Rosy Cross

I suppose that in such productions he was directing atten-
tion sensationally to the fact that he had brought something
into existence under an historical label, had placed himself
at its head, and that it charged substantial fees. I have
worked through such of his volumes as are available here in
England, from so-called Rosicrucian dream-books to de-
clamatory sex-reveries, and have concluded that, mounte-
bank as he was, he believed in all his rant and was not lying
consciously when this stuff of sorry dreams was put forward
unfailingly as the wisdom of the Rosy Cross. This is how
it loomed in his mind and this is what it was in dream, for it
was a thing of his own making. On this subject he is his
own irrefutable witness, affirming that “very nearly all
which I have given as Rosicrucian originated in my own
soul.” When he talks of initiations, “ officiating girls ”
and “ strange oaths,” we may infer that he held meetings
of some kind, but I have failed to obtain particulars.? It
is, I think, sufficient for our purpose to recall that he signed
as “Supreme Grand Master of Eulis, Pythiane and Rosi-
crucia, Hierarch of the Triple Order.”

One of his admirers and fellow-workers was F. B. Dowd,
subsidiary no doubt to himself, yet claiming the titular
position of “ Grand Master Imperial Order of Rosicrucia.”
In 1882 he issued a small volume entitled Tue Tempiz oF
THE Rosy Cross,? otherwise concerning “the soul, its
powers, migrations and transmigrations.” ‘The references
to the Order are few and far between, and there is nothing
on the historical side, but there is one excursion in prophecy

1 See Evuis, ed. of 1874, p. 47. In Randolph’s opinion, expressed in this
volume, Hargrave Jennings was “ the chief Rosicrucian of all England,” and
he quotes in this connection from Curious Tuines or THE Outsipz Wortp,

2 According to Sédir, the Randolph incorpcration was a société d’éditions,
which may be substantially true, but on the understanding that the “ edi-
tions” meant works by the author of Euuis.

3 [ts substance seems to have been reproduced by Dowd in Tur Gnostic,
edited by George Chainey and W. J. Colville, eleven issues of which appeared
at Oakland and San Francisco, between 1885 and 1888.

613

-- Page 653 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
concerning a day to come when a great, peace-bringing
power shall be poured from the Temples of the Rosy Cross
and no one thereafter will be disposed towards evil. On
the point of fact, while abiding with things as they are, the
Rosy Cross is described as a Fraternity rather than an Order,
though attempts have been made to establish it on the
latter lines, and some of these have succeeded. The inti-
mation is useful as a probable side-light on the inchoate
state of the Randolph institute. And so is that which
follows: ‘I meet many Rosicrucians, and although total
strangers, we know each other at sight.” The so-called
membership was therefore a matter of disposition, not of
integration in a given mystic circle, under which circum-
stances we can understand easily that the Brethren are
said to be numerous, indeed “ of all nationalities and all
climes,” but also scattered, as they would obviously be. It
is added that they meet occasionally, but are not summoned,
being drawn together by the spirit, “as of one accord.”
Reflecting from Randolph, the author affirms that prior
to the times of Christian Rosencreutz, they were called
Essenes, Illuminati and so forth, apparently by any title
which has ever been held to distinguish “intensely and
transcendentally spiritual’? men. For the rest, Dowd
affirms (1) that there is a virtue in the human soul which
is capable of eternally renewing “youth and beauty”:
otherwise there is an Elixir of Life; (z) that the transmuta-
tion of metals is possible but is no longer of any service to
the true Rosicrucian. This approximately is the sum of
the allusions, and the rest of the volume is filled with moony
vapourings on the principles of Nature, on body and spirit,
mind, faith and knowledge, the soul and its transmigrations,
will and spiritual gifts. They are a little after the manner
of Andrew Jackson Davis. Dowd has been mentioned only
because of his relations with Randolph, whose occult
activities began about 1859, and after his unfortunate
614

-- Page 654 --
The American Rosy Cross
suicide—with the date of which I am unacquainted—his
wife published new editions of his works till near the end
of the nineteenth century.

Meanwhile the Societas Rosicruciana in Scotia, holding
from that 7 Anglia, chartered a Philadelphia College for
Pennsylvania in 1879 and a New York College in 1880 “ for
New York State.” My authority! proceeds to record that
in April of the latter year these two bodies established a
High Council for the whole of America, and that it char-
tered Colleges in Boston for Massachusetts, 1880; in
Baltimore for Maryland, 1880; and Burlington for Ver-
mont at a date not given. The New York, Baltimore and
Boston branches became dormant, the last in August, 1896.
One of its members was Sylvester C. Gould, editor of an
American Notes anp Quertss and of a quarterly periodical
called Tue Rostcructan BroTHErHoop, 1907-9.2 It is
affirmed that “ from the moment ” that the Boston College
suspended “‘ his chief ambition was to hold the work fast,”
looking “ beyond the ideas which dominated the fraters
(sic) of his day.” He did nothing, however, till November,
1908, when he laid plans in conjunction with a few Soc.
Ros. members, apparently of New York, for the formation
of a body on broad principles “‘ and opening its doors to
all true seekers.” A Soctetas Rosicruciana in America is
described as having begun in this manner, its “ rituals,
traditions, landmarks, customs and practices” having been
“carefully gathered” by Gould, who died, however, in
July, 1909, so that the work and its developments passed
into other hands. It has abandoned the Masonic qualifica-
tion, originally and elsewhere required for membership, and

1 Mercury, the “ Official Messenger of Metropolitan College, 8. R-.
1: A-.,” Vol. ii, No. 5.

2 [ have inspected a complete file, which contains practically no original
matter, while its reprints are drawn from readily available sources. Mr.
Gould had evidently sincere interest in his subject, but he seems to have
known nothing about it.

615

-- Page 655 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

it initiates both sexes. So far as J am acquainted with its
activities, the work undertaken is done in an earnest spirit ;
it has gradually rectified its Latin—at least to a certain
point—and is an exponent of esoteric Christianity, as this
is understood by its leading spirit. But it has obviously
no tradition, no claim on the past and no knowledge thereof.
The Transactions—now apparently available to any sub-
scribers—are amazing reading from the standpoint of things
put forward under the denomination of the Rosy Cross.
Of recent times it seems to have borrowed Grade and Order
titles from connections of the Hermetic Order of the
G..D... The headquarters are at New York, and there
are branches in various places.

It would serve no useful purpose to enlarge upon later
foundations, like that of Dr. R. Swinburne Clymer, who
seems to have assumed the mantle laid down by Randolph,
or Max Heindel’s Rosicrucian Fellowship of California.
‘They represent individual enterprises which have no roots
in the past.

616

-- Page 656 --
CHAPTER XXIV
LAST DEVELOPMENTS OF THE MYSTERY
We have seen that from an early period in the disjointed
pageant of Rosicrucian history there are traces of a spiritual
intent. Though he carries a heavy yoke of physical alchemy,
there are a few saving intimations in the long literary
record of Michael Maier that he knew of other gold than that
which is found in earthly mines and of other transmutations
than those that are wrought in crucibles. He had heard
at least of a Medicine which is not administered to men
through lips of sense. Robert Fludd is like a prophet
of the Rosy Cross on an uplifted platform of lucid Christian
Theosophy. We remember also some pearls of a certain
price among too few citations in the little books of Thomas
Vaughan. The eighteenth century offers some curious
lights, too few also and very far between. It would seem
that there were several schools within the general circle
of the Order and so far as the available records are concerned,
they offer but little to our purpose in the connection which
is here in view. ‘They were (1) those of the astral workings,
activities and fruits of the magical paths in their distinction
from the Higher Magia: the Order of the Golden Dawn
offers a late witness or example concerning them ; (2) those
which confessed only to dedications in physical alchemy,
like the Reformation of 1777; and (3) those for which the
Kentish philosopher Fludd stood up a most valiant champion
more than one hundred years before: they diffused a
welcome light, but in the period which followed it shewed
only occasional gleams.
617

-- Page 657 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

About the Rosy Cross in Russia, it is difficult to speak,
except on the external side. It appears to connote a purely
spiritual movement, but it must be confessed that the life
behind that movement escapes in the analysis of its overt
and documentary side. The Rosy Cross in Germany
during the reign of Frederick William II leaves us also
with an uncomfortable feeling of having missed something,
though it can scarcely lie in the direction of Wéllner and
his immediate associates, who seem to have been grinding
no other axes than those of their personal advancement
and who inspire a profound distrust. ‘Thereafter it is
a complete blank, so far as memorials are concerned, till
Rudolf Steiner began, some twenty years since, to use
the name and symbols of the Rosy Cross in his reproduc-
tions of a qualified modern theosophy. I have reflected on
his claims and have left them, because the path of occult
science is not the path of God and because any putative
marriage between things occult and mystic is more like
a marriage of heaven and hell than anything met with
otherwise in the world of disordered experiment. For the
rest, it is not to be supposed that Dr. Steiner, though it
has been reported that he derives from some German Order
of the Rosy Cross, could produce any definite historical
connection with the past, supposing that he wished to
do so, which it seems fairly certain that he does not—
being his own authority, at its value.?

It seems undeniable therefore that the links are broken
everywhere. The various associations and sodalities which
have claimed the generic title exhibited in the early seven-
teenth century, rose up in their day, advancing their par-
ticular claims, and they died also in their day—again
so far at least as any records are concerned. It is above all

1 At the root it is a modern occult adventure in akasic records, and we
have the means of presuming its value by the light of other adventures in the
same field.

618

-- Page 658 --
Last Developments of the Mystery

things probable that their connection one with another
was in the bond of union furnished by an identical name
and a certain consanguinity of intention, whatever the
intention was. As it seems entirely certain that the phy-
sical alchemists who, in one and another generation,
worked under the style and title of the Golden and Rosy
Cross, did not attain their physical end in the Medicine
of men or metals, and that those—if any—who followed
the dubious paths of Ceremonial Magic made no advance
therein, so it is of little consequence if the links between
them are of name and purpose only. Having regard to
the voided term, it would be of no real moment were the
chain of succession complete, however considerable the
interest which might reside in the established point of fact.

J have dealt as an historian throughout this work and
so far as little else, developing the records of the Rosi-
crucian mysterium magnum to the best of my ability and
knowledge from the standpoint of simple scholarship
and critically as to all mendacious claims or romantic
reveries, including the theses of writers who—in one or
another interest—have had their particular axes to grind.
It may be thought that the Order itself has evaporated
under such a process. "That which remains, however,
is the Rosy Cross, a body of Christian symbolism, variously
interwoven and clothed in various forms. As to the fact
of its existence there is a broken but recurring witness.
To each epoch its own particular manifestation and its
special concern of the moment, but in the background of
all there looms vaguely, or is bodied forth in distinguishable
if unaccountable shapes, the orm of a Godward side.
After the pure Christian Theosophy of Robert Fludd, to
which I have just adverted, a luminous body of doctrine
suggesting a certain basis in mystical experience, there is
the clouded sanctuary of the Sigmund Richter school,
dealing in nothing but physics, yet holding that these are

619

-- Page 659 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

a work on the Divine side and demand a Divine motive
in the art thereof. J must set aside the Magia belonging to
astral workings because there are no particulars: it connotes
the activities of-seers who had never passed through the
Mystic Cloud of Unknowing; but we have heard of a
Higher Magia, and though it happens seldom enough that
God is in the visions or auditions, the tactions or psychic
messages, it may follow on not less rare occasions that those
who are sanctified before they travel in the spirit vision
will find a door open and a path of issue towards the world
of another order. So here also there is a kind of background,
though for us it can offer only a field of tentative specula-
tion. Again alchemy prevailed and again it was in the
physical realm, but with certain ofacular voices sounding
from a void behind in the Ritual vestiges of 1777. The
Secret SymBous may be telling another story amidst the
Hermetic motley of their vestures.1 Within a Masonic

1 As I have been told that in Russia, prior to the recent revolution and
indeed before the War there was still a Rosy Cross which was a kind of
family inheritance, concerned solely with Magic and have set it aside for
want of evidence, though the communication was made in good faith, so I
have heard and left over some vague rumours that the chief secret of the
Order was a sex-mystery. It does not happen to come from those who,
groping in the dark over cryptic texts, have suggested to themselves and
others that the Key to alchemical literature should be sought in this direction.
There is a broad sense in which many and most of our problems have sex at
their root, but the historical problem of the Rosy Cross has no traces of this
kind and its literature above all has none. There is of course a sex-side in the
psychic which belongs to the hallucinations of Black Magic and has an echo
in Le Comte pr Gapatis. This very curious document has been represented
as a betrayal of Rosicrucian secrets, which is not the case, and there is an old
story that its author, the Abbé de Villars, was assassinated by the Invisibles
on account of it, but his death was the result of a vendetta which avenged
a similar crime on his own part, as his latest biographer tells. The sex-side
of Black Magic is like the rest of it, abomination and infamy. I have
heard of modern practices in the guise of experiences on the astral plane.
That evil side of German Rosicrucianism at which a German witness hinted,
some few years since, to myself, may have to do with these sense-welterings,
and the circles concerned would bear the same relation to the true Rosy
Cross as the petit résurrection des Templiers in Paris bore to the Masonic
Grade of Kadosh or to the Military and Religious Order of the Temple.

629

-- Page 660 --
Last Developments of the Mystery

circle in the meantime there had arisen the Grade of Rose-
Croix, which—in another form of language—might have
come out of a quiet study in a beloved manor at Bearsted.
Hereof is the succession before us and so far as evidence
is concerned it is suggestive of new things grafted on the
original root of the early seventeenth century, or—as
I have intimated—that there were many Orders of the
Rosy Cross rather than one obedience continually varied
and transformed. Now, in the sense of such grafting
I testify that the Rosy Cross is in activity at this memorable
day and new epoch of the world under greater warrants
than the past held up in its beacons to any of the old
Adepti, and clothed also in other and more radiant
vestures. JI have taken all Ritual as my province and the
Great Rites and Hierarchic Orders have written their
messages in my heart. JI have loved the beauty of their
Temples and the hallowed walls whereon their symbols
shine. I know their secret language and the still deep
wells of life which lie concealed within them. But there
is nothing in the world of Ritual to compare with the high
pageant of the Rosy Cross, transformed by the Light of
the Spirit into a Hidden House of God. It is a place of
valid sacraments, abiding within the measures of sacra-
ment, and the grace of their meaning shines through the
outward veils. There is nothing in the catholic world of
instituted symbolism to compare with the gospel thus
conveyed, gospel of quest, gospel of path and term, of the
soul in separation and in union, and of That Which is
All in All—the Life Which is hidden with Christ in God.

The question being how such a transformation has
come about, let it be recalled in the first place that I have,
in Masonic parlance, most especially excepted all question
of continuity because there is no vestige of evidence to
support it in the long story of succession.’ In the second

1 [It should be added that, alike within and without the Circle here

621

-- Page 661 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

place, and as something of living importance to the subject
at large, I appeal to that which lies behind—as it lies
also within—Rosicrucian history—I mean, the Secret
Tradition in Christian ‘Times, to the various departments
of which I have devoted so many volumes during the years
of my literary life. One and all are witnesses to a process of
development or transformation which took place within
them. I do not speak here and now of that which historic-
ally and theosophically is at the root of all, the renewal
which was suffered by the world-Mysteries of old under the
light of the Christian gis. The great religion which began
its career of conquest in a.p. 1 adopted, adapted and gave
a new birth in time to whatsoever of Greece or Rome
could be bent and shaped to its purpose and to whatsoever
from eastern sanctuaries of old found meeting-points at
Alexandria and Byzantium. Iam very sure that the great
antique tradition of Egypt was, as to living essentials,
absorbed in Christ. J am not less certain that through all
those years when the schools of neo-Platonism made their
stand against Christianity they were doing unawares the
work of Christian formation, that when dying Plotinus bore
the Divine within him to the Divine in the universe,
the theosophy which he left on earth, in respect of all its
vitality and all its Godward side, was carried into the
Christian Sanctuaries, to dissolve and be reborn therein.
The world of thought and the world of action were then
alike in the crucible, and that crucible was Christ. They
came out therefrom in the soul and body of a new order,
having also a new spirit within them. They were no longer
of Egypt and the East, of Rome or the Greece behind it:
all these had suffered transformation.

Let us look at some other and—within their own measures
referred to, the claim of antiquity could not only offer no test of value, as
it does not justify itself, but the affirmation, wheresoever it is made, conveys
unawares a strong counsel of caution.

622

-- Page 662 --
Last Developments of the Mystery
—very typical conversions. There is that of chivalry by
the spirit of romance, converting crude and predatory
feudal knighthoods into a great ideal, mystical and holy
order, as much and as little on outward land and sea as
are the light of “consecration and the poct’s dream.”
It produced a great tradition of impossible books, a world,
moreover, of quests and attainments, and high dwellers
therein: Arthur and his companies of kings; the Round
Table and its “ flower of all the world”; Charlemagne,
Roland and Oliver, shining among the peers of France ;
above all Lancelot ; and in fine Perceval, and Galahad
as more than he. This golden tradition gave us Christian
womanhood, the type above all womanhood. Now the
point is that it took over the rough knighthood and trans-
formed it in its own alembic.

But the makers of chivalrous romance did much more
than this and earned yet a higher title to immortal fame.
There had come to them strange tidings as from some
mystical Carmel or holy Horeb, like unto that Mountain
of Initiation and Hill of Wisdom, about which we have
heard otherwise in Thomas Vaughan’s strange fragment
from a rescript of the Rosy Cross. They were tidings of a
great mystery behind the Sacred Eucharist and Mass-
Words not found in liturgies, whether of Rome or Sarum.
This is on the one side and the other is Celtic lore, telling
of the Cauldron of Ceridwen, Cauldron of the Dagda,
Broth and Wine of Wisdom, myths of quest and venture,
wild enchanting tales of exile and return. They drew
these medleys of early folk-tale together and raised them
into the light of the Holy One by interweaving the Euchar-
istic Mystery, legends of Passion-relics and legends of
conversion. Out of such marriages there issued the romance-
literature of the Holy Graal, the later quests of Perceval
and the sacro-saintly quest of Galahad, the high prince.
Again the point is that folk-lore was taken over, saturated

623

-- Page 663 --
The Brotherhood ofthe Rosy Cross
with pre-Christian elements, and was transformed by
another tincture, in another alembic, presenting a new and
gloriously emblazoned aspect, for those who can see and
hear, of legend and tradition in Christian times.

There was also, coming down from comparatively early
Christian centuries, the Secret Tradition in Israel, of the
SepuHer Ha Zouar and other memorials of Kabalism. Be-
fore it was formalised by Rabbinical doctors of the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries it constituted within its own
measures a luminous, if inchoate, theosophy. I know of
few literatures which radiate such startling lights of specu-
lation. They are reflected there and here into the doctrine
of the Rosy Cross. Now there came a time in the fourteenth
century and from this date onward when Zoharic literature
fell into the hands of Christian scholars. I have cited
them so often that it shall be held needless here even to
repeat their names. JI have shewn also how it appealed
to them and how it was used by them, as an independent
and unexpected demonstration of Christian root-doctrine
grown up in Jewry itself during the exile of those terrible
centuries when persecution followed persecution, after
the fall of Jerusalem. It came about in this manner
that the Kabalah was Christianised. Once more the point
is that a traditional teaching was taken over, was informed
with another meaning, adapted to another purpose and
in this sense transmuted.

The position of alchemy has been made plain already in
these pages, but its mystical body of symbolism was not so
much taken over as used concurrently by two schools. In
fine there was old Operative Freemasonry, its art and craft,
its body of moral duty, and the sweet savour and incense
of its religious atmosphere. That which befell it was long
posterior to the genesis of the Rosy Cross, but there is nothing
more signal in the secret traditional records than the
transformation of Operative into Speculative Masonry,

624

-- Page 664 --
Last Developments of the Mystery

while there is no more marvellous and golden chronicle
than the true and literal history of the growth of Rite and
Grade which developed from that root through all the
spacious epoch of the eighteenth century. After two
volumes devoted recently to this subject my only point
here is—yet once moré and now last of all—the fact of
transformation.

Hereof in brief outline is the career of the Secret Tradi-
tion in Christian Times, over against which is the devolution
of Catholic doctrinal tradition under the egis of the
protestant reformation. It is none of our concern here.
The transformation of the Rosy Cross came about, I con-
ceive, in the same manner and for the same reasons that
ruled in the other conversions. In each case there was a
material tolerant to the change involved and, so to speak,
there was a predisposition also in the direction of the kind of
change. Under the providence of Latin Christianity that
which is understood among us as the Mystic Quest came
forth bearing the signs and sigils of a valid sacrament, and
the transformation of chivalry by romance was like an
epoch in its natural evolution. The matter of folklore
for the creation of Graal literature was already in the world
of symbol. Zoharic Kabalism was theosophy ad origine
symboli and the outward body of theosophy is plastic and
transforms easily. So also the many veils of the Great
Mystery in physical alchemy, peculiar and unique as they
were, constituted a broidery of images derived from Art
and Nature, the elements of which had been in use from
time immemorial in Magna Mysteria Dei. Witness the
Stone and the Medicine. It was the same in respect of
images belonging to the art and craft of building, including
the art itself.

And so also with the matter of the Rosy Cross. ‘The
elements comprised therein were already in the course of
transformation, Magia into Higher Magia, the meta-

28 625

-- Page 665 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
morphosis of alchemy into the conversion of souls. It
seems to have stood for these new births more or less from
the beginning. Kabalism was incorporated therein, but
long after Mirandula and Reuchlin had begun their work
upon it. Moreover, the great central sign and symbol of the
Rose placed upon a Cross could never, as we have seen, have
signified anything but a spiritual and as such a Christian
Mystery. The Cross was typically that of Calvary, from the
days of Robert Fludd, and the Rose was the Rose of Sharon.
My position is therefore that though many associations
sprang up successively and concurrently under the implied
and expressed claims connoted by the same recurring
denomination, though their history is chequered enough,
though that which was called originally the House of the
Holy Spirit may have been occasionally a den of thieves, the
sacramentalism of the sign remained, and—again in the
natural evolution of things—it was antecedently and above
all things probable that there would come about (1) a
reversion to the one only and valid message of the sign ;
(2) a desire on the part of some who knew and were of the
elect that the Rosicrucian House of the Holy Spirit should
become or again be consecrated to the Holy Spirit of God.

It is this transformation which has come to pass in fact.
The old Rosicrucian Tree of Life in Kabalism has become
the Tree of Life in mystical experience on the ascent of the
soul to God. The light of the Rosy Cross under such new
birth in time is the light of the world in Christ. The
path of progress through mystical Grades and Worlds is
the path of the soul’s return to that centre from which it
came forth, or even to God Who is its end. After this
manner is adeptship transformed by sanctity, the key and
secret of all being the translation of Ritual into life. The
term and crown of all is a great mystery of attainment, and
he who is called Sapiens in the records of the seventeenth
century is one witness concerning it. The new spirit has

626

-- Page 666 --
Last Developments of the Mystery
changed not the old name, which is of catholic and perfect
meaning in the world of types, but it has changed the body
of the thing and has given it a robe of glory. .

There is a sense also, but as if unawares, in which the whole
Secret Tradition of Christian Times has passed through its
alembic. It is not officially or conventionally an Order of
Chivalry ; there are no accolades or titles of knighthood ;
yet is it a Spiritual Chivalry, a Chivalry of the City of God
anda Militia Templi. It is not in competition with external
Christian Churches, and yet it is a Church of the Elect, a
Hidden and Holy Assembly. It is not a College of dog-
matic Theology, but it is a House of Christ Mystical.

1 It may help to avoid misconceptions, though they are avoided seldom
enough in subjects of this kind, if I state categorically that in the text above
there is no reference whatever to that “exalted Rosicrucian centre ”? men-
tioned by Sédir—Hisrorre pes Rose-Crorx, pp. 128, 12g-~and referred by
him to the year 1898. Its location and mode of recruiting are said never to
have transpired, which notwithstanding the deponent seems qualified to
affirm that “ the initiation is very pure and essentially Christian.” At p. 139
of L’Inrriatron for 1912, Papus speaks of a mysterious association of
“developed men under the title of Rosicrucians,” used as an exoteric
name which conceals another in the hiddenness. He says also that there are
only ten true Rosicrucians—presumably of this association—and that he is
acquainted with them, though he does not belong to the number. We may
compare Edouard Schuré: L’Evorurion Divine pu Spuinx au Curist,
Paris, 1912, p. 350. Asa point of Rosicrucian tradition he affirms that “ the
Spirit who spoke to the world under the name of Christ and by the mouth
of the Master Jesus is spiritually joined to the King-Star of our system ”—
i.e., the Sun. But this is the Rosicrucianism of Dr. Steiner, who is reported
in Tue Vanan as once lecturing at a German Theosophical Congress on
“The Initiation of the Rosicrucians.” It appears to have been presented
as a “sevenfold scheme,” and this scheme was said to be expressed symboli-
cally in the Gospel of St. John. There is no such Grade-progression known
or heard of in the Order prior to Dr. Steiner; I conclude therefore that
he ailudes to a system of his own, and I have long understood that he works
something of the kind in secret. T'o make an end of these miscellaneous
garnerings, the Theosophical Society of England and Wales started a Temple
of the Rosy Cross in London, from whic: were developed branches in
Manchester, Edinburgh, the Hague, Krotona and Adyar. It appears to have
been moribund in 1918. It was looking for a new ‘l'eacher, and claimed, I
believe, no connection with the past. Among those who belonged to it
I know one at least who found no light therein.

627

-- Page 667 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross

There is a form of government, but the Head of all is
Christ, the Hidden Master of the Rosy Cross. It has no claim
on Apostolical Succession, looking rather to that super-
ordination which is conferred otherwise than by imposition
of hands. And yet it is a House of the Holy Graal in the
sanctity of a High Symbolism, where the sacred intent of the
Order is sealed upon Bread and Wine. The reason is that
they are primary among signs efficacious of things signified
in the consecrations of the natural order, for the realisation
of the inward truth that Divine Substance may be com-
municated to the soul through outward channels of grace.
But beyond this normal mode there is recognised also
another and more direct communion, between the Divine
in the universe and the Divine in man, widelicet, God and
the soul, by the way of channels that are within. So is the
Graal manifested, and so also is withdrawn.

Moreover, the theosophy of the Rosy Cross is not a
rabbinical theosophy in what may be called the rabbinical
sense, as any doctor in Jewry and any scholar on MiprasHIM
would be quick to recognise, and yet the purest of those
Zoharic lights to which I have referred are woven into its
veil of symbolism, because they happen to serve its purpose
and help to perform its work. For the Order is a path of
symbolism, as it was indeed from the beginning,? and it
remembers how long ago the Golden and Rosy Cross made
appeal in its Ritual procedure to the Sephirotic scheme of
Kabalism. There is also an alchemy of the spirit, as Robert
Fludd understood it within the measures of his particular
illumination ; but it has passed beyond Summum Bonum
and Puitosopuia Friuppana, to find a higher light of
transmutation and a yet more catholic Medicine. It calls

1 It isa path of symbolism at its highest and has cut itself adrift as such
from all occult adventures, the mendacious inventions and fradulent conno-
tations of the past. It should be understood therefore that it does not belong
to history.

628

-- Page 668 --
Last Developments of the Mystery
to be added that this also is a sacro-saintly veil of some-
thing behind or within which is not indeed more holy but
is a yet brighter sign-post set up over the rock of ages.

To make an end in fine of these spiritual consanguinities,
the Rosy Cross is not a Rite in Masonry and does not
demand now, as it did once, a Masonic qualification of
members, yet the key of Masonry is there, for it is a mystery
of new life, of figurative or mystical death, and after these
experiences there is a Great Mystery of Raising. But it is
all in the light of the Sun of Christ, shining at the zenith-
altitude in a heaven of soul, no longer in the substituted
and penumbral rays of the Craft Mason, which have been
called darkness visible. So also there is a Quest of the Word,
pursued from Grade to Grade; but the instructed Brother
of the Rosy Cross knows that albeit the journey is taken from
East to West, those quarters of heaven are termini of another
cosmos. If he reaches the Grade of Master, he finds the
Word, but it is not uttered with lips of the body of this
world or heard with the ears thereof.

I may seem to have cited as one speaking unawares that
pregnant formula concerning the Quest of the Word, but
it leads to my last point, which is another story of trans-
formation, and this in a dual sense. There are few things
older in myth and symbolism than the Great Word, the
Word of power, which appears sometimes as the secret of
the gods, or of some one or other among them. There are
many variations of its story and it is met with in many
environments, perhaps the most unlikely of which might
seem to be Operative Masonry. It is there, however, or at
least in the Scottish Craft, emerging as a Masons’ Word, the
earliest reference to which connects it with Jakin and Boaz.
It was, of course, a secret, and the Entered Apprentice
seems to have been taught concerning it. The palmary fact
about it is that of its possession. From the standpoint of
the old Mystery of the Word, it is the last transformation

629

-- Page 669 --
The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross
or reduction into the lowest possible term: in place of
a secret of the gods, it has become the palladium of a
common craftsman and a right earned by his reception into
a worker’s guild. The communication to this extent may
even be called automatic. When, however, Emblematic
Freemasonry came upon the scene in London there took
place also—but post 1717—a remarkable transformation in
respect of the Word. The palmary fact concerning it was
no longer that of its possession but of its loss rather and the
communication in its place of more or less idle substitutes.
We may speculate as we like upon the grounds and reasons of
this change, and I have shewn elsewhere that it connotes an
acquaintance—somewhat through a glass and darkly—with
the Secret Tradition in Israel. There must have been other
sources, however, or other influences at work, for out of the
specific loss there arose also a quest which has been called
—rightly or otherwise—the Mystical Quest in Freemasonry.
“From small beginnings unto greater ends” is an old, it
may be, an honoured adage. Hereof is the Mystery of the
Rosy Cross in origin, history and development. At the last
close of all, there is something that remains to be intimated,
and it is of two kinds: (1) There is that which is left over
for want of available materials, and here it is an open ques-
tion whether there is any way in which our knowledge is
likely to be extended, unless it be in respect of accidents
and minima,in days to come; (2) There is something which
belongs to the Holy Assembly, is reserved thereto and can
be found only by those who are without when he who is
now a Stranger at the Gate receives that call which takes
him across the threshold. But this is of the spirit, is indeed
the inward life, and not matter of history. Benedictus
Dominus Deus noster qui dedit nobis signum. For those who
know or can discover the authorised battery of the Rite, it
may happen that the door will open and that he—Ostiarius
Magnus—by whom they are admitted will be Christian Rosy
630

-- Page 671 --
APPENDIX
ADDITIONAL EXPOSITORY NOTES

I. Astrar Worxines, p. 3. The first distinct allusions are circa
1777, and it is indicated—p. 620—that their nature does not emerge.
Among early records, there is something behind the Fama reference
to Elementary Spirits, and its nature is indicated by the kind of
activities which came out from the Purtosopuia Sacax of Paracelsus :
it might be called Experientia Sacax. But in the last quarter of
the eighteenth century Pasqually was already in the world, and his
Rite of Election is a strange finger-post pointing towards such
paths. ‘There are, moreover, certain things in the hiddenness, of
which I do not speak here because of their dangers, and because
their claim upon a Rosicrucian source cannot be established, though
the roots may be older than appears likely on the surface.

II. Purtosopuer’s Stone, p. 3. In the course of our research
we have seen and heard continually of Lapis Mineralis in its contrast
with the Spiritual Stone. Tihe Rosy Cross is like alchemical litera-
ture, in the sense that the one is not without the other all through
its chequered history. Nothing better or clearer will be found upon
this subject than is the discourse appertaining to the Order of
Princes Chevaliers de Rose-Croix, pp. 469, 470.

III. Rosicructan or Romance, p. 4. On the one hand, Robert
Fludd and the unknown Sapiens are not in the likeness of Mejnour
because the Occult Adept is not a Spiritual Master: on the other,
the long procession of late and early mountebanks cannot be com-
pared with Zanoni because they do not recall Saint-Germain, or
even Cagliostro.

IV. Scorrisn Puttosopuicar Ritz, p. 7. On this subject see my
New Encyctopmpta or Freemasonry, II, 411. ‘The Catalogue is
important and I append particulars, hoping that a copy may be
found. Title: CaraLocue pz 1a Brstioruque prs ARCHIVES
G... pu Riv Ecossats Puttosopnrevs. Orné dune planche.
Annotation: Catalogue d’une précieuse collection des livres anciens,

632

-- Page 672 --
Appendix
manuscrits et imprimés, de documents originaux, etc. Vente de
23 février, 1860, et jours suivants. Paris. Tross, 1860, in 8 de
III pages.

V. Naomertria, p. 38. The Librarian of the Landesbibliothek,
Professor Letize, has been good enough to look at one of the
Studion MSS. and has derived an impression that the account of it
in the Reperrorium seems substantially correct, but the uncon-
ditional identification of its reveries with so-called ‘“ Rosicrucian
wisdom ” seems exaggerated in his view. He claims, however, no
special knowledge of the subject, and has not been able to do more
than glance at the text. He has found many references to the
Cross and Cruce signati, but the index gives two only regarding the
Rose. It is obvious, however, that these may stand for many pages
of disquisition in the work itself. I am justified therefore in saying
that the results are negative, and it is obvious for the rest that a
considerable acquaintance with early Rosicrucian dreams and
speculations is necessary to determine their analogies—if any—in a
still earlier text. Professor Leiize has recognised this and has con-
veyed his impression tentatively and under all reserves. As regards
Studion’s methods of calculation for prophetic and other purposes,
he proceeds from the beginning of the Christian era, from the
foundation of the City of Rome, or from the Creation of the World,
as one or the other happens to suit his purpose, and he connects
historical events which in reality are widely separated by the help of
these chronologies, though they do not belong to one another. It
seems probable that a thorough examination of Naometria would
exonerate the witnesses concerning it in a general sense, being that
with which I am concerned, yet not in every particular.

VI. Mrritia Crucirera Evancerica, p. 41. Buhle, on the other
hand, takes an opposite view and considers that the sect can have
been neither very large nor important. He suggests also that he had
found no account of Rosicrucian meetings in Naomerrria; but
(1) so far as I am aware, no one has said that they were there, and
(2) no first-hand acquaintance worth naming with the text of that
yast MS. is shewn anywhere in the Biihle monograph. I hope that
on my part I have done nothing to put it forward as other than
a Rosicrucian precursor, characterised by similar concerns, the same
spirit and analogous forms of symbolism. The Miitia was no more
than a field in which the Order may have sprung up.

VII. Fama Traprrronat History, p. 47. The transformation of
the Rosy Cross is delineated in my last chapter, dealing with things
as they are, though there is that also which is to come. The tradi-

633

-- Page 673 --
Appendix

tional history develops in this process and emerges as a real legend
of initiation. It could not be otherwise when the whole symbolism
is embraced by the work of conversion. According to John Yarker,
the Jerusalem Encampment—presumably of Knights: Templar—
working at Manchester about 1827, practised not only their own
Order or Degree but a version of the Rose-Croix, in which the
Fama legend was recited and at a certain point of the narration the
Most Wise President touched a concealed spring, upon which the
representation of “Sir Knight Rosenkreutz” is said to have
“started from the tomb in symbolic resurrection.” See S. C.
Gould’s Quarterly, Tue Rosicrucian BroTueruoop, Vol. I, p. 115.
f quote this as one who puts up a casual sign of direction.

VII. Pianco MS., p. 55. I have promised a further reference
to this subject, but it can be only to note that in his chronological
account of the Order and its history the concealed author does not
cite his supposed source of information referred to 1374. That date,
in view of his hypothesis, signified nothing of itself, and the fact
that it antecedes the mythical birth-period of Christian Rosycross
according to the Conressio would also signify nothing, for Magister
Pianco had obviously set aside the Fama legend.

IX. Rose or Licut, p.67. As regards the Christ-figure suspended
in the sun with extended arms, my annotation says that there is
no distinction between the Cross in this form—i.¢., the cruciform
human figure—and the Rose in the state of attainment. The ex-
planation is that a Calvary Cross is a symbol of human nature in the
manifested state, and in that which is called attainment humanity
becomes the Rose, that is to say, the Christhood. Rosa Christus est.
Herein also is the Incarnation understood mystically.

X. Tuesaurus Tursaurorum, p. 70. I am glad to add that the
Supreme Council MS. under this title has proved to be only mis-
placed, that it is now restored to the proper shelf, and that I have
had an opportunity for its examination by the courtesy of the
Secretary-General. lhe body of the work is entirely alchemical,
the processes described therein being identified throughout as those
of the Rosy Cross. It recalls in this manner and otherwise the
Prrrecr anp Trust Preparation of Sigmund Richter. There is a
preface concerned with traditional history and the descent of Her-
metic Alchemical Mysteries from the days of Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob to those of Moses and Aaron, thence to Joshua, David, Solomon
and so forward into Christian Times. The preface is followed by
certain Rules of the Brotherhood, to the number of 35, after
which there is the Juramentum Fravernitatis. These Laws also

634

-- Page 674 --
Appendix

recall, though they are not identical with those published by
Richter: it must be said that they are substantially the same; so
are the modes of salutation; and we hear also of an Imperator
ruling the Order. As regards a.p. 1580, being the date which
appears on the title-page, that inference which my note draws, a
little in the dark, from the denomination of Rosy and Golden Cross
is justified, not alone generally by my examination of the MS. but
specifically by the fact that it quotes Sendivogius, who was not born
till 1566, while the Novum Lumen Cuymicum, which passes under
his name, was first printed at Prague—but said to signify Frankfurt—
in 1604.

XJ. Rosz-Symsot, p. 95. The Beatific Rose of Dante, in which
those who behold the Vision are represented as if rising and sinking,
appearing and passing out of sight, is said in my text to have another
meaning, belonging also to another category than that of early
Rosicrucian symbolism. This highest mode is adumbrated only in
the most exalted Grades, when the spirit of man at the end of all
the sacraments quivers on the threshold of absorption, dissolves, as
it were, therein, but returns inevitably therefrom. Jn the sensuous
imagery of the Zonar it seems intimated by the sex changes of the
Great Angel Metatron, trembling before the last Veil of the Presence
and vibrating with the ineffable ecstasy. Nature was not ashamed
of her emblems for the doctors of the Higher-Kabalism, but in such
types the essence of the subject escapes: the sense-images have
passed before that threshold is reached, even in thought.

XII. Simon Stupron, p. 182. Professor Letize tells me that I
do not stand alone in regarding this name as assumed. ‘There seems
no question on the subject in the minds of Ferdinand Haug and
Gustav Sisel, who state that “his real German name is unknown,”
and suggest that it was perhaps Eifest. See Tue Roman Inscrip-
TIONS AND Scutprures aT WiRtremsBerc. 2nd ed., Stuttgart, 1914,
p.2. In the opinion of Professor Letize, “ it must have been the son,
the student scholar, who latinised the name, and not the father.”
But he cites a notable passage on p. 1170 of Naomerria, in which
Studion speaks of his descent, mentions that he had been assistant
in the school at Stuttgart, and was transferred to Marpach as Pre-
ceptor. In Marpach his father, Jacob Studion, had a house built
by himself, and he had become Coguus Aulicus—t.e., Court Cook—
there being a ducal castle in that town. The father was born in
1517 in the village of Flechdorf, in the county of Waldeck.

XIII. Decraratio Brevis, p. 281 ef seg. The existence of this
MS. and the nature of its content were made known for the first

635

-- Page 675 --
Appendix
time in 1895, when I contributed an article on the subject to Tue
Unxnown Wor tp, a magazine under my editorship. See Vol. I,
Pp. 134, 135.

XIV. Vaucwan’s Fame anp Conression, p. 376. With reference
to my annotation on this page, the date 1658 (alternatively 1659 in
some records), which has given rise to the idea of a second edition,
is evidently a scribe’s blunder or a misprint. See Gould’s Rosi-
crUCIAN Broruernoop Quarterly, Vol. I, p. 71, where the full title
is given. It is described as printed by J. M. for Giles Calvert, at the
Black Spread Eagle, at the West end of St. Paul’s, 1659. But—date
excepted—these are the very words of the 1652 and doubtless sole
issue. Gould’s title does not specify that it isa second or new edition.

XV. Laws or tHE Fama, p. 401, note. The six rules observed
by the early Brethren should have been given in my descriptive
account of the I'ama, but they are matters of common knowledge
and may be now summarised thus: (1) The Brethren should profess
only to cure the sick, ‘‘ and that gratis”; (2) They should wear no
distinctive habit; (3) They should meet annually at the House of
the Holy Spirit on Dies C.’,, “or write the cause of absence” ;
(4) Each of them should endeavour to find a worthy successor ;
(5) The letters C.".R.°, should constitute their seal or mark; (6) The
Fraternity should remain secret for 120 years.

XVI. ‘Tue Si,ence oF THE Rosy Cross, p. 402. Of the activi-
ties, such as they were, and the records—if indeed any—it is impos-
sible to give account, apart from the resources of continental libraries.
There may be something in Dispuratio Historica pe Ros#-Crvu-
cianis, of C. §. Kazauer, published in 1715, and there are several
other tracts which it is not worth while to enumerate, as none of
them seem available in England. Towards the end of the eighteenth
century there were attempts to reconstruct the past, but one is in
the same position concerning them in most cases. A few others—
which are available—offer mere vestiges, apart from all evidences.

XVII. Te Rosy anp Goupen Cross, pp. 441 et seg. The sources
of this monograph are a collection of many years, and I am hoping
still to extend them, in case an opportunity should enable me to go
further than is possible in this volume. I am looking also for other
Rituals, and especially for additional German versions of circa 1850
and later. It must be understood that the archives otherwise are
extensive, as they now exist. It should be possible also to go further
into the Rosicrucian claims on Masonry from 1780 to the period of
the French Revolution. J infer from Gould’s larger history—section

636

-- Page 676 --
A lppendix
on the Golden Rosicrucians, in his third volume—that he had met
with rumours of other sources, There are casual references in many
places. In respect of the Secret Tradition which I have summarised,
PP- 441, 442, my most important materials are in Codex No. 3 of a
Grade of First or Lesser Adept: it differs substantially from Nos, 1
and 2, these varying only verbally from one another. All of them
demand comparison with secret developments of the Strict Obser-
vance, circa 1780, included in my collection. As regards Egypt,
there are strange intimations in two secret Degrees entitled respec-
tively S..0..8... and G..0..T..8."., the real names of which are
believed never to have transpired. The variants of Adeptus Minor
are very striking, both as to procedure and the additional instructions
which have grown up round them. This applies also to Adeptus
Major, which, in one version, being that of Senior Adept, is con-
cerned with the black state of the Spiritual Stone and the passing
from that state. There is also Supreme Adept, corresponding in
other codices to Adepius Exemptus, and therein the Candidate re-
ceives in his hands, actually and not symbolically, the prepared
Matter of the Work. It happens sometimes that what is put literally
in one sequence may be found expressed by emblems in another.
The instruction on planets and metals, as adapted in my text, is
fantastic apart from the light furnished by an alternative codex.
The Asrronomia Inrerior of M. Fried, 1674, claims to be the work
of a Rosicrucian, as well as an astrologer, chemist and amateur of
Natural Magic. The seven metals are symbolised as seven earthly
planets, corresponding to those in the heavens. It is difficult to
accept the claim made on the Order or to take the writer seriously
in other respects ; but the speculative lore is curious and it may have
reflected something from the alleged source. From this point of
view, Fried is useful for purposes of comparison with Rosicrucian
formule of the Reformation and later periods, scattered through
various texts. It remains to say that Tue Rosicrucian Unveitep
of Magister Pianco gives account of the Zelator or Funiores Grade,
while Diz Turoritiscnen Bruper, of 1785, attributed to Graf von
Lohrbach, has a mass of reliable information on the second Grade
of the series, though it claims to be published by a “ profane.” There
is an Appendix also on the third and fifth Grades. A third printed
work, fullest and most important of all, is the Srarxe Erweisr, etc.,
of J. J. Ch. Bode, published in 1788 and containing the “ genuine
Rituals ” of the Order of the Golden Rose Cross, “‘ amended accord-
ing to the last supreme and Reformatory Convention for the use of
all worthy Brothers, as well as other Masters of the Appearance of
Light and the Lost Word.” ‘The Reformation out of which they
637

-- Page 677 --
A. lppendix

arose, and with which I have dealt so fully, is described here as
authorised by the Superiors of the Order in 1777, cum cordantia
Fratrum at Leipzig, Vienna, Regensburg and Berlin. Bode claims
that they have been brought forth at the close of the first subsequent
Decennium “ by a genuine lover of the True Light.” As regards
the Starke Erwetsz, or Strong Proofs of his title, they are to the
effect that “ the authentic writings of the Most Holy Order ” exhibit
its destinies as of “ eternal efficacy and activity,” seeing that they
are centred in God. So far as printed documents are concerned, my
appeal is to these three sources for the authenticity of my account
of the Golden and Rosy Cross in and after 1777, though it draws
from wider archives.

XVIII. Frarres Lucis, pp. 508 et seg. I have omitted to mention
that Mrs. Cooper-Oakley’s account of this Brotherhood appeared in
Tue Tueosopuican Review, Vol. 41.

XIX. THe Russtan Rosy Cross, p. 547. It is to be hoped that
some qualified person will take up the work which calls to be done
on the Rosy Cross in Russia. ‘There is a vast mass of material avail-
able, at Petrograd and Moscow, if ever the star of peace should dawn
on that tortured country. The connection of the mystic Lopukhin
with its brief season of activity is significant from my own stand-
point ; and outside his CuaracTeristics oF THE InreRtoR CHURCH,
which I have helped to make known in England, thefe is not only
his Masonic Carecuism, but above all his Ritual of THe Sprriruat
Kyicut, to a modern reprint of which in the British Museum my
attention was drawn some years since by a reference in a theosophical
magazine. It seems probable that both may offer some light—direct
or reflected—on the subject of this chapter. The Candidate for
Spiritual Knighthood is described as a “searcher after supreme
wisdom,” and he is pledged to the maintenance of seven rules, con-
cerned with Fidelity to God and to the Order. ‘The maxims are:
“Know thyself” and ‘“ Happiness is within.” As regards cere-
monial, this seems to have been exceedingly simple, but at the end
there was an Eucharistic observance, in which salt signified wisdom,
while Bread and Wine were emblematic of the Secret Work. The
jewel was a gold heart, inscribed with a Cross. A white mantle was
worn, embroidered with golden roses.

XX. Rostcrucran BroTrurruoop or MANCHESTER, pp- 563, 564.
The volume of “ antiquarian interest? mentioned in my text is
Tur Tree or Commonweattu, by Edmunde Dudley, described as
written in 1509-10, and “ now first printed for the Brotherhood of
the Rosy Cross.” It appeared in 1859. At the time of composition

638

-- Page 678 --
Appendix
the author was a prisoner in the Tower, having been sentenced to
death for treason.

XXI. Apprramenrum Macnum. As the final and most im-
portant of these Expository Notes, I am now able to add that the
providence which overwatches undertakings of this kind has, at the
last moment, fulfilled itself and that the Landesbibliothek of
Stuttgart has sent for my inspection the original quarto copy of
Simon Studion’s Naomerrta, in two volumes, so that I can make at
first hand an examination of its content and check the reports con-
cerning it of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. The
collation is as follows: (1) General title, for which see p. 48 of my
text, but after anno 1604 appears the word Consistorium, as if the
debate between Nathanael and Cleophas belonged to official pro-
ceedings. (2) Dedication to Frederic Duke of Wirtemberg, pp.I-177.
(3) Vatidice et antique imagines tres, quibus totius bujus Naometrict
voluminis prognosticum comprehenditur et confirmatur, pp. 178-189.
(4) Corollarium Naometricum de Friderico Secundo Romanorum Im-
peratore, pp. 190-205. (5) Second Title: Naometrie Nove et
Prognostict Pars Prior, unpaged. (6) The Dialogue which comprises
the work begins on new p. I, after which the names disappear, but
it follows from the questions embodied in sub-headings that
Nathanael continues to ask and that Cleophas answers. Pars Prior
ends on p. 877, and so also does Vol. I. (7) Third Title, unpaged :
Naometria Nove et Prognostict Pars Posterior : In Cructfer@ Militie
Evangelice gratiam, Authore Simone Studione, inter Scorpiones, Anno
1604. Consistorium. (8) After Title the pagination of Part I con-
tinues from p. 879 onward, ending on p. 1790. (9) 16 pp. blank.
(10) Hieroglyphicus Simonis Studionis, entitled Versus de instantis
temporis fato imminente, being six lines unpaged. (11) The same, set
to music, unpaged. (12) Full Index, also unpaged.

I proceed now to check the representations cited in my second
chapter from Reprerrorium Lirerarium and the later witnesses with
the results of my own examination. (1) As regards the Mititta there
is no evidence that Studion attended the Meeting at Liineburg and
much less that he convened it. (2) When the Reperrorium states
that it was a branch of the Rosicrucians, “‘ as is well known,” it calls
to be said that the evidence is not in Naomerria. (3) When it
affirms that the Mruitia became “a strong sect,” the evidence must
be sought elsewhere. (4) On the other hand, the Meeting itself was
of some note and moment, as Studion tells us—MS. pp. 149, 150—
that it was attended by German Princes and by legates of the King
of Navarre, Queen of England and King of Denmark. (5) It took

639

-- Page 679 --
Appendix
place on July 27, 1586, and is termed in the marginal reference Cruce
Sicnarorum Conventus. (6) The business in hand was help and
defence in common, in case of hostility on the part of the Holy
League—presumably the Catholic League of 1576-93, founded at
Peronne to prevent the accession of Henry of Navarre to the Throne
of France. It came to an end when this Prince was reconciled to the
' Latin Church. There was an earlier Holy League, 1511-13. (7) It
follows that the Convention was political and summoned as such in
the interests of Protestant Powers, though religious convictions are
implied. (8) Studion calls it Fundamentum Con federationis Evangeli-
corum and Initium Federis Evangelicorum Principum Protestantium,
terms which appear to imply only a Political Alliance. (9) But the
allusions in his titles to Mruiria Crucirera EvanceELica might con-
note a military and religious foundation in the likeness of the
‘Teutonic Order and the Christian Chivalries of crusading times, to
both of which he refers elsewhere in his text. (10) I leave it an open
question whether the Rererrorium, von Murr and Biihle are right
in calling it a sect: it is quite possible that a perfervid dreamer like
Studion saw a great army of God arising out of such an understand-
ing as is said to have been reached at Liineburg.

(11) However this may be, the remaining affirmations concerning
the views of the Mitiria must be taken for references to NAOMETRIA,
as our only source of information concerning it. (12) It offers no
trace whatever of Paracelsian influence; it never mentions chem-
istry ; its only astronomy is that of signs in the heavens, applied
to prophetic purposes with the help of numbers. (13) It is an
apocalyptic work, based mainly on the Boox or Revetarion, but
at need taking all Scripture for its province. (14) It is not an occult
work in the sense of being magical, alchemical, Hermetic and so
forth: there is no vestige of these things in all its pages. (15) On
the other hand, the Reperrorium and its successors bear true witness
when they say that Studion and those for whom he stood were looking
for a renovation of the earth, for a general reform to come; that
they regarded Scripture as “ written within and without”; that
they were ultra-Protestant, “heated by apocalyptic dreams,” and
regarded the Pope as Antichrist.

When the occult element is thus removed from Naomerria we
seem to be taken a great distance from the Fama and Conressi0:
let us test therefore the reports of the witnesses concerning Rose and
Cross. It is true, as the REPERTORIUM says, that Studion derives long
predictions from Rose Symbolism, though his references to the Rose
are two. ‘The basis of all is the numerical value of the Hebrew letters
comprised in the word pbyam, which he translates Rose. The

640

-- Page 680 --
Appendix

value in question is 530, and he connects it with that of mww
=661, translated as Lily. The sum of these numbers is 1191, and
this he regards as a date, being approximately that on which the
Teutonic Order was founded, which Order is a type of his Mrzitia
Evancetica, dwelling sub Rosa et Lilio (p. 1673). So also Godfrey
de Bouillon, who took Jerusalem, cum principibus cruce signatis, is a
type of “ our new King,” namely, Him who is to come (p. 1689).
As regards Cross Symbolism, the text is full of its mysteries: there
are pen drawings of the Rose, but the Tau Sign, the Sign of the
Cross is everywhere. It is the Sign of the Living God (p. 565) ;
the Crux Salvatoris is the name of a star in heaven (p. 955) ; we hear
also of the Exaltation of the Cross (p. 292), of the Feast under that
name, and the finding of “ the Cross of the Lord ” after it had been
taken into Persia. Of the Cross in Studion’s numerology and the
predictions drawn therefrom I forbear to speak. And now as to the
test question, whether there is a marriage of the Rose and Cross in
symbolism, the answer—to my surprise—is affirmative. It is found
in a diagram on p. 271, the description of which is: Hierichuntis
Rosa ex quatuor ejus portis. The Cross is in the centre, encompassed
by a crude whorl of five petals and this by another whorl of eight
petals. Four of these correspond to the Four Living Creatures and
the four gates of the Mystic City, which city “ lieth four-square,”
as we know, and there is a square about the whole diagram. It follows
that I have searched vainly everywhere in my fourth chapter for an
example of the Rosy Cross prior to the publication of the Fama—
Luther and his seal excepted—and that I have found it at last in
Naometria. I care nothing how Studion interprets his symbol, or
that it is covered with groups of figures, that these figures are dates
and belong to the prophetic business of the work. He calls the
symbol Rosa and he places a Cross in its centre: the analogies are in
Tue SEcrET SYMBOLS.

1 have reached a main point of this study, and there is little space
to go further. The new stars of the Conressio are like the Cross,
all over the text, and they are that which the Conressio says, signs
of great council, for those of 1§72 and 1602 have reference to the
year 1620, “ which is fatal to the Man of Sin,” otherwise the Sove-
reign Pontiff (p. 146). It is true that in another prophecy he is to
be crucified in 1612 (p. 417) and that 1620 is the coming of the
Kingdom (p. 85), an event, I suppose, by which his spirit is over-
thrown for ever. There is scarcely an end also to prophetic tales
concerning the Morning Star, the Star Lucifer and Vesper, and the
mysteries of the planet Venus. The Conressto is like a short excerpt
from the greater text. The renovation to come is a renovation of

2T 641

-- Page 681 --
Appendix

kingdoms and churches (p. 491): it connotes the New Jerusalem,
the renewal of the whole world, the Regnum Dei et Christi (p. 1615).
And Regnum mundi dabitur Evangelicis. My conclusion is that
RePERTORIUM never spoke more truly than when Naomerarta is said
to breathe the Rosicrucian spirit—apart as it is from that of Para-
celsus, dwellers in the elements, ever-burning lamps and “ rogues and
runagates ” of alchemy.

It should be added that the Cruce Signati, who also recur every-
where, are scarcely an incorporated Fraternity: they are Lutherans
and Zwinglians (p. 386); they are the saints and martyrs of Aroc.
vil, 14, and those who bore the sign upon their foreheads (p. 379) :
their type is the patriarch Joseph (p. 975). Not only the concealed
author of Conressro but those who wrote several later official docu-
ments would agree with the Reperrorium that all this “ embodies
real Rosicrucian doctrine.” And I think also that I am justified in
stating, on p. 50 of this work, that the R.".C.", was in embryo circa
1604, as also that Naomerria is its first memorial, in the sense of a
precursor. ‘The bibliolatry and sectarian zeal, the fever of false
prophecy and the war of separation in Christendom were things in
which it began and Studion is the protagonist of these ; out of these
it had to come and it emerged slowly enough, as the Conressro shews.
It assumed occult dedications and married them to current theosophy,
which was raised in the person of Fludd and a few less known wit-
nesses beyond all normal modes. That in all the Hidden Houses it
had not emerged entirely even at the end of the seventeenth century
is suggested by the case of Kelpius: that it was occult rather than
mystical throughout the eighteenth century is clear from its general
history, though another and sacred leaven was at work in Russia.
And so the tale goes on, to the threshold of the last developments.

I have sketched once more the career of the Rosy Cross, and as one
who has followed it through long years in all its paths I bear my
faithful witness that it is impossible in the light of my knowledge to
read the work of Studion without seeing that its beginnings are there.
And the Anabaptist charge which was raised so early against the Rosy
Cross was raised also against him by Melchior Fischlin. It follows
that Rererrorrum and the other witnesses are, as I expected, justified
in a general sense, though I shall never understand how the philosophy
of Paracelsus could be traced in Naometaia. It follows also that its
reflections in the Fama are not drawn therefrom, as I have suggested
at p. 211 on the basis of the German Repository. There is, however,
little else to correct, save an error in my third note on p. 41. The
Rosicrucian thesis in Repertortum is pseudonymous, not anonymous,
appearing under the assumed name of Wilhelmus ab Indagine. It

642

-- Page 683 --
INL

ABAFI, Ludwig, 354 |

Acception, Lodge of the, 364, 365

Acta Latomorum, 7, 60, 448

Adamson, Henry, 373

Adhémar, Comtesse d’, 493, 494

Adumbratio Kabbale Christiana, 592

Advancement of Learning, 30, 31

Advent, Second, 43, 47, 113

Agrippa, Cornelius, 14, 15, 34, 35

Albrecht, H.C., 450, 503

Alchemy, New Light of, 414

Alchemical Society of France, 588

Allary, Francis, 82

Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie, 214

Amphitheatrum Sapientia Eterna, 17, 61-70,
75,155, 310

Anacalypsis, 105, 562, 563 !

Andrew, Ff. V., 26, 41, 45, 48, 49, 10, 122, 135,
181, 182 et seq., 269, 270, 279, 355, 421

Andreas von Carolstadt, 267

An irée, Von, 434

Anima Magica Abscondita, 15, 300

Anthony, Dr. Francis, 315

Anthroposophia Theomagica, 225, 374

Antichrist, 152 .

Anticrisis ad Responsum Florentini de Valentia,
245

Antipantzerfegerianus, etc., 243

Antworde, etc, 223

Anweisung des Rechten Wegs, etc., 260

Antwort oder Sendbrief an die Briid. vom

RC .., 220
Apocrisis ... ad Famam... Fratrum...
Ru C.., 226

Apologia Compendiaria, 280, 281, 284

Apologia Frat. R..C .*., 251, 252

Apple Tree Tavern, xr

Apuleius, 159

Ara Faderis Teraphici, 232

Arbatel, De Magia Veterum, 400

Arcana Arcanissima, 313, 314

Arcana Totius Nature, 347

Arcane Schools, 9, 14,15, 37

Archangelus de Burgo Nuovoa, 56

Aristotle, 123, 218

Arndt, Johann, 200, 230

Arnold, Gottfrid, 70, 71, 107, 199

Arnoldus de Villanova, 9, 10, 97, 98, 99, 311,
331,459

Aroux, Eugéne, 32

Ars Quatuor Coronatorum, 276

Artephius, 6_

Ashmole, Elias, 365-372, 375, 383, 384, 395,

Ashmolean MSS., 36 6

shmolean +) 36,145, 219, 3

Asia, Seven Churches of, ‘son 9

Asiatic Brethren, 508, 524-526, 527

Ass, The Golden, 159

Assertio Fraternitatis R«.C atey 252

Athene Cantabrigienses,17

Atlantis, The New, 21,23, 25,26

Augsbourg, Confession of, 55, 182, 183, 241

6

EX

Aula Lucis, 570

Aureum Seculum Redivivum, 35%, 352, 475:
476) 477-479

Aureus Tractatus, 352, 475,475, 479

Aurifontina Chymica, 355

Avrora, 59

Ayton, Rev. W. Alexander, 559

Baa SHEM, 560, 561

Backhouse, William, 367, 370, 371, 395

Bacon, Francis, 6, 18-34, 136, 195; Francis
Bacon and his Secret Soctety, 21; Tragedy
of Sir Francis Bacon, 30 ; Baconiana,155 ;
Journal of the Bacon Society, 30

Bacon, Roger, 16, 60

Bacstrom, Dr. Sigismund, 549-560

Baptista Porta, 6

Barlet, F.C., 12

Barnaud, Nicolas, 75-78

Barrés, Maurice, 600

Barruel, Abbé, 433

Barthold, F. W., 490

Basil Valentine, 459

Bayley, Harold, 29, 31, 107

Bergen, L. C. von, see Orvius, 349

Berliner Monatschrift, 507

Bernard, St., 87

Bernard Trevisan, 231

Besoldt, Christoph, 200, 201

Bethlehem, the House of Bread, 298

Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 9

Bischoftswerder, J. R., 492, 497, 504, 505, $06

Black Magic, 592-594

Blavatsky, H. P., 583

Bobé, Louis, 493

Bocealini, Trajano, 118

Bohme, Jacob, 57, 58, 59, 70, 71, 200, 217, 3574

48x

Bshme, Jacob, and the Alchemists, 355

Bonneville, Nicholas de, 51

Book M.°*., 125, 128, 129, 134, 325, 329, 391

Book of Formation, 278

Book of St. Dunstan, 372

Booz, Adam, 288, 289

Breckling, F., 71

Breve et Simplice Riposta, 222

Browne, Sir Thomas, 389

Brucker, 184

Bruni, Dr. Fulgence, 598

Bruxius, Adam, 242

Buhle, J. G., 21, 39, 41, 52) 117, 193, 195, 196,
197, 201, 216, 218, 268, 290, 301, 314, 435

Burton, his Anatomy of Melancholy, 308

Cabala, Speculum Artis et Natura in Alchymia,

225

Cadet de Gassicourt, 497 .

Cagliostro, Count, 499, 500; Mémoires
Authentiques pour servir & l'histoire du
Comte C., 1b.

Campanella, T., 26, 354

Cantor, Dr. Georg, 63, 155

+4


-- Page 684 --
In

Casanova, Jacques, 491

Casaubon, Meric, 17

Castelot, Jolivet, 587, 588, 589

Catherine 1i, 508, 530, 540, 545, 546

Cento Ovidianus, 246

Cento Virgilianus, 246

Charges and Constitutions, Old Masonic, 421

Charles I, 308, 309

Chazal, Comte de, 549, 55%, 555, 556, 5593
Anecdotes of , 556-558

Chevalier de la Rose Croix, 83

Chevaliers det' Atgle Notr, 428

Chevaliers de La Rose Croissante, 432 ~

Chivalry, Romance Literature of, 623, 624

Choiseul, Duc de, 484, 485, 486-8, 489, 490, 492

Christian Rosy Cross, 43 et passim

Christianus Philadelphus, 234

Christliches Schreiben an die Bréd. Rv. C.,
34t

Christ-Lore, 91

Chroniques de V Qiil de Beuf, 494

Church, Some Characteristics of the Interior. 537

Chymische Hochzeit, 155, 158-181, 185, 186,
187, 188, 189-191, 193, 194, 198, 199, 210,
227, 228, 231, 238, 270, 319, 343, 357; 401,

_ 437; 548, 595, 596

Cipher MSS., 582, 583

Clavel, 456, 526

Clavis Philosophi# Fluddana, 295, 302, 303,
304, 427

Clopinel, 93

Cloud of Unknowing, 73

Clymer, Dr. R,S., 616

Clypeum Veritatis, 261-263, 268

Cochheim, J. H., 342, 343

Cohausen,7

College of Physicians, Roll of the Royal, 279

Colleges of Secret Knowledge, 324, 330

Collegium Rosanium, 344

Colloquim Rhodostauroticum, 332, 333

Comenius, or Komensky, 354, 384

Comte de Gabalis, 14, 573

Confessio de Chao Phystco-Chemicorum Catho-
lico, 64 .

Confessio Fraternitatis R.*. C .*., £7, 42,43, 46,
63, 143-157; 194, 215, 219, 229, 238, 254,
255, 256, 258, 263, 270, 303, 311, 319, 321,
322, 325,375,376, 386, 404

Confessio Recepta, 228, 229

Consider atio, Secrettoris Philosophia,18,1 44,146

Conspicilium Notitia, 244

Cooper-Oakley, Isabel, 488, 492, 493, 498, 508,
518, 521, 524, 526, 527

Copernicus, 74

Cramer, Daniel,234

C..R..C.., ie, Christian Rosy Cross, 43,
55, 56 et passim

Craven, Rev. J. B., 108, 157,273,274, 277; 2955
299, 301

Cross, Order of the Golden, 343

Crusius, Martinus, 40, 182

Cuno de Falkenstein, 10-12, 35

D’ADHEMAR, COMTESSE, 492, 494; her
Souvenirs, ib.

D’Affry, Comte, 486-488 .

D'Alembert’s Encyclopédie, 234

Damcar, 37,127, 128, 155,156, 202, 325, 422

Data of the History of the Rostcrucians, 19, 137

De Arcanis Catholice Veritatis, 278

De Augmentis, 25

De Circulo Physico Quadrato, 314

Declaratio Brevis, 281-283, 635, 636 .

‘Dee, Dr. John, 15, 16, 27; 35, 53,155, 2245 his

True and Faithful Relation, 17; Private
Diary, 17; his edition of Roger Bacon's
Epistola, 15, 16,224 |

De Genlis, Comtesse, her Mémoires, 490

272 6:


esx

De Guaita, Marquis Stanislas, 596, 597, 598,

5

Delingation of the Celestial Temple, 44

Delusions, Memoirs of Extraordinary Popular,
I4) 47, 235

Demuitiges Sendschreiben, etc., 224

De Nullitate Magia .. . Epistola, 16

De Quincey, Thomas, 39, 41, 51, 129, 183, 193 ;
his Inguiry, 129

Descriptio Fraternitatis Rw. C.*., 258, 259

Descriptio Ripa Cimbrica, etc., 5

De StellaAdmirandainCassiopee Asterismo, 17

Des Erreurs et de la Vérité, 529

Diagraphe Fratribus Rosea@ Crucis, 220

Diana, Alchemical, 328

Diary of a Rostcrucian Phtlosopher, 559, 560

Dionysius, pseudo-, and his Celestial Hierarchy,
400

Disraeli, Isaac, and his Curiosities of Literature,

30

D'Oberkirch, Baronne Henriette Louise, and
her Mémoires, 530

Doctrine and Literature of the Kabalah, 44

Dumbeler, Joannes, 11, 12, 36

Dunstan, Book of St., 372

Durandus : his Rationale Divinorum Oficiorum,
88

Ecuo der von Gott-Hocherlunchteten Fraternitet

des... Rw. C.'., 77, 232, 253-257, 270
Echo Colloquit Rhodostaurotici, 333~335, 343,
356

Eckartshausen, 296, 481, 524

Eckert, E. E., 366, 493

Ecker und Eckhoften, Hans and Heinrich, 444,
445, 524, 525, 527, 528, 533

Effroyables Pactions . . . entre le Diable et les
. . « Invisibles, 338, 359

Eglinus, Raphael, 47, 252, 253

Einfaltige und Kurtze Antwort, etc., 220

Einfaltigs Antwortschreiben, etc., 223

Eirenzus Philalethes, 384, 385

Elaguin, 537, 533

Elements, Symbolic, 457, 458

El Havareuna, 394

Elias the Artist, 47, 51, 241, 242, 253

Elixiy Vite, 405, 406, 439, 550, 55%

Elucidarius Chymicus and Elucidarius Major,
185, 227, 228

Ely, Dr. Stanislas, 532

Ennemoser, Joseph, 276, 277

Enoch, Tablets of, 399

Entdeckte Mummenschantze oder Nebelkappen,
ete., 242

Epistola ad Rev. Frat. R.*.C.., 218

Epistola ad Illust. ac Rev. Frat. R..C."., 220,

260
| Epistola ad Ven., Doct. et Iuminat.. . . Frat,
RwoiC."., 223

Epistola Commentatoria, 243

Epistolain Summum Bonum, 379

Epistolatrium liberalium .. . artium studios-
orumad... Frat, Rw. C.., 223

Epitimia Fraternitatis R.'. C.., 265, 266

Equites Auret Lapidis, 82

Ergon et Pavergon Fo. R.°.C.*., 335-338

Essay on Spirit, 373

Eucharist, Holy, 241, 311, 312, 313, 623, 628

Eucharius Cygnus, 243, 244,245

Eugenius Philalethes, see Thomas Vaughan

Eulogistia e Symbolo patris Primarti Ro. Co
234

Eve, Mexican, 86

Examen fucorum Pseudo-Chymicorum, 318

Examinatio Brevissima, etc., 243

”

Fak, Dr. J. F., 560, 561
Falk, C.S., or Falcon, 561

5

-- Page 685 --
In

Falkenstein, Cuno von, ro, 11, 12, 35, 36, 59

Fama e Scanzia Redlix, 232,233

Fama Fraternitatis R.*.C.., 13, 15, 23, 26, 28,
30, 32, 37, 42, 47, 48, 50, 55, 55, 59, 74, 103
104, 113-142, 143, 144, 155, 166, 194, 195,
196, 197, 199, 200, 207, 209, 210, 215, 219,
226, 244, 254, 255, 256, 258, 270, 289, 319
321, 322, 323, 325, 326, 327, 328, 344, 346,
355, 368, 375, 376, 381, 386, 391, 404, 417,
435; 573,595, 632, 633, 634

Fama Remissa, 240, 241

Faulhaber, Johann, 224

Fendenberg, Franz, his Geschichtedes R.'.C.*.
342

Ferguson, Prof., 11, 64, 114

Fidele Animi Fidelis Speculum, 227,228

Figulus, Benedictus, 9, 57, 75, 78-81, 97; 417,
418

Findel, 181, 254, 350, 404, 405, 506, 507, 524

First Matter, 221, 376, 395, 514, 518, 519

Fischlin, Melchior, 49, 50

Flanders and the Rosy Cross, 36

Fleece, Order of the, 36, 513

Florentinus de Valentia, 245-247, 267

Flowers and Flower Lore, 101

Fludd, Robert, 27, 28, 29, 30, 96, 97, 98, 107,
108, III, 112, 156, 157, 199, 226, 227, 240,
248, 268, 271-308, 314, 315, 340, 342, 344,
356, 363, 364, 365, 367, 378, 380, 382, 384,
395,423,427, 430, 457, 532, O19

Fons Gratia, 263, 264, 268

Fornerus, Fredericus, 353

Fort, G. F., 4

Fortalitium Scientia, 264

Fortuyn, C. J., 4,5

Foxcroft, E., 158, 160, 40%

Francmaconnerte, Hist. Pittoresque de la, 456

Frater Crucis Rosata@, 258

Frater non Frater, 260

Fratres Lucis, 502-528

Frawen-Zimmer der Schwestern des Rw.C.".,

209
Frederic, Duke of Wiirtemberg, 46, 50
Frederic William II, 504, 505, 506, 533, 618
Freemasonry, 1, 2, 6, 139, 141, 364, 395, 396
427, 418, 419, 420, 421, 433,439; 440, 441—
445,545 ;
Freemasonry, Concise History of, 435
Freemasonry, Royal Cyclopedia of, 6, 355, 359
Freimaurerer in Oesterreich, etc., Geschichte der,
354 |
Freimaurer Zeitung, 457
Fréres Chevaliers de Rose-Crotx, 468-475
Fréres de la Croix-Rozée, Examen sur la...
Cabale des, 360
Friend, Rev. Hilderic, rox
Fritz, Joachim, 108, 378

GABELLA, Puriirpus A, 18, 144, 146

Galatinus, Petrus, 278

Galileo, 74

Garasse, Pére, 353

Gardianus, Frater, 36

Gassendus, Petrus, 105, 106, yor, 302

Gaultier, Abbé, 47, 235

Geheime Geschichte eines Rosenkreusers, 503

Geiger, Philipp, 342

German Spectator, 440

Getrewer Eckhart, 342

Gichtel, J. G., 58

Gleichen, Baron de, 445, 494

Gmelin's Geschichte der Chemie, 348

Godwin’s St. Leon, 208

Golden and Rosy Cross, 403, 404, 410, 413, 439)
441, 636-638

Golden Dawn, Order of the, 581-584

Golden Fleece, Knights of, 36, 167

Golden Rose, 88

6.

dex

Golden Rosicrucian Order, 506

Golden Stone, Order of, 179, 188, 189, 343

Golden Treatise, see Aureus Tractatus

Gould, C. F., 80, 435

Grand Lodge of England, 1, 2, 419

Green Lion, 97, 181

Griesmann, Valentine, Getrewer Eckhart, etc.,342

Grindliche Anweisung, ete., 349

Griindlicher Bericht, 259, 380

Gutmann, ZEgidius, 91, 72, 73, 114, 134, 332,
340,357

Hacxwoop, F. W., ot

eRe y Ort 3 102 348: 350 357

Halliwell, J.O

Hammeguleh Hambaaneah, 394

Hammer, Von, 131

Harless, Dr. von, 107, 355

Harmonia Imperscruiabilis Chimico-Philoso-
phic@ Decades Duo, 12

Harmony of the World, The, 393

Harpocrates, 86

Hartmann, Dr. Franz, 187, 430, 481, 482

Haselmeyer, Adam, 50,114, 115, 117, 196, 218,

234
Heckethorn, C. W., 9

Heindel, Max, 616

Held, Dr. F.C., 195

Heldenbuch vom Rosengarten, etc., 341

Helias Tertius, 242

Heliophilus Philochemicus, 253

Helvetius and his Vitulus Aureus, 400
Heredom of Kilwilling, 427, 432, 453
Hermetic Students of the G.*. D.*., 582, 582
Hermippus Redivivus, 8

Hess, Tobias, 45, 46, 48, 49, 208

Heyd, Dr. W. von, 40, 4

Heydon, John, 30, 100, 112, 383, 387-397, 402,

437

Hidden Church} 328, 627

Higgins, Godfrey, 562, 563

Hilarion, Benedict, 333-335, 343

Hintnem, Johann, 269

Hiram Abiff, 123, 139, 440

Hirsch, M. C., 199, 200, 230

Histoire des Rose-Croix, 7,74, 81

Historia Gildarum, De, 4

Historie de Rosenkreuzer, Unpartetische Sam-
lungen zur, 9,35, 35, 7.

History of the Church and e Heretics, 199

Hockley, Frederick, 569

Holy Guide, The, 392, 393

Hortulanus, vel Ortbolanus, 11, 36

House of the Holy Spirit, 298, 423

Houses of the Order, 3, 86, 88, 346, 407, 414,

Howie's New Royal Cyclopedia, 107
Hunter, W.S., 86, 88, 109

IMITATION OF CHRIST, 73, 357

Imperator, 12, 61, 131, 405, 407, 408

Incombustible Paper, 289

Indagine, J. L. ab, 349

India. Pretended removal of the Brotherhood
to, 244, 403

Initiated Brothers a Asia, 508, 524-528

InN Rawle

Instruction a la Frace, ete., 357, 358

Irenzus Agnostus, 248, 250, 251, 252, 260, 267,
263, 264, 265-268

Irwin, Major F. G., 569, 570

Isaiah sub Cruce, 250

Isis Unveiled, 583

Italy and the Rosy Cross, 36

JANNET, CLAUDE, 115, 146
Jean de Meung, 93
Jean du Roquetaillade, 99

6

-- Page 686 --
Ine

Jocus Severus, 318

Judges in Israel, Order of, 581

Judicia . . . de Statw et Relig. Frat... . de
R..C ."., 226, 227

Judicium Theologicum, 227

Julianus de Campis, 145, 257, 258, 270

Junge, Joachim, 74

KABALAH, 3, 56, 89-92, 100, 278, 298, 516, 527,
589, 590, 591, 592, 624, 625, 626

Kar! of Hesse, Prince, and his Mémoires, 496

Kelpius, 601 et seg.

Khunrath, Conrad, 64 ~

Khunrath, Heinrich, 17, 61-72, 95, 96,155, 213,
_ 224, 310, 468

Kieswetter, Karl, 12, 13, 14, 52, 61, 78, 130,
_ 303, 347, 350, 413, 415, 416

King, C. W., and The Gnostics, 83, 131, 273

Kircher, Athanasius, 354

Kloss, 16, 267, 351

Kneph, The, 435, 50

Komensky, Amos, see Comenius

Lane, Ossian, 424

Lanovius, Franciscus, 302

Lapis Philosophorum, 405, 406, 412, 437, 455;
456; varieties of, 465

Latin Church, 305

Lebenswaldt, Adam, 355, 402

Lefranc, Abbé, 73

Leibnitz, 74, 362 |

Lenglet du Fresnoy, 73, 143, 236, 344, 345, 362

Leona Constantia, 553, $54

Lévi, Eliphas, 61, 64, 65, 66, 95, 213, 577, 583,
583,595,596; Histoire dela Magie, 96

Libavius, Andreas, 17, 18, 151, 152, 235-240, |
257, 287, 310; his Analysis of the Con-—
fessto, 151, 152; note on his Rosicrucian
writings, 239

Liber T ."., 29, 126, 133, 134, 251, 252, 267

Life, Brethren of the Common, 36, 60, 74

Lindner, T., rr

L’ Initiation, 12

Little, R. W., 564, 565, 566, 567

Lives of Alchemystical Philosophers, 277

Locher, Jacob, ror

Locke, John, 373

Lopukhin, I. V., 537, 538, 545

Loretto, Litany of, 91

Lost Language of Symbolism, 30

Lotos Bleu, Le, 20, 498

Luchet, Marquis de, 500

Lucianus Rinaldus de Perfectis, 545

Ludovicus, Duke of Wiirtemberg, 50

Lully, Raymund, 8, 9, 10, 35, 59, 81, 211-213,
311, 446, 459, 588

Lusus Serius, 315-317, 375

Luther, Martin, 47, 55, 71, 10%, 112, 184, 195,
230, 234, 269, 311, 34%

Lux, Hosea, 83, 84

MACKAY, CHARLES, 14, 47, 235

Mackenzie, Kenneth R. H., 6, 355, 359, 381,
561, 565, 566, 567, 584 -

Mackey, A. G., 107

Magonnerie Pratique, 37

Madathanus, Henricus, 351, 352, 475-479

Magicians, Order of, 9

Magister Pianco, 10, 37, $5, 442-445, 542, 545,
549, 634, 637

Magnesia Catholica, 64

Magnetic Electrum, 289

Magnum Opus, 305, 312, 550, 551

Maier, Michael, 12, 28, 30, 35, 75, 97, 105) 117,

“199, 237, 276, 279, 290, 304, 310-339) 375+

oO .
Manchester Transactions for Masonic Research,

14
64

Lex

Mangetus, Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 9

Martinis, 529, 530, 544, 546

Mary’s Chapel, 3, 4

Mathers, S. L. M., 582

Mauritius, 549 et 3eq.

Measurement of the Divine Body, 44; Measure-
ment of the Earthly Temple, 44

Medicine of Men and Metals, 439, 551;
Supreme Medicine, 321

Melchior Cibinensis, 311, 312

Mémorial dun Mondain, 491

Memphis, Rite of, 6, 9, 430, 432, 502

Menapius, F. G., 244, 245, 246, 259, 332, 391

Menapius Rose@ Crucis, 246, 247

Mercure de France, 359, 361, 362

Mersenne, Marin, 294, 295, 296, 301, 302

Messenger, The, 22, 33

Metals and their Symbolism, 460-464

Militia Crucifera Evangelica, 41, 43,45, 54,71,
113, 147, 192,193, 208, 211, 213, 231, 254

Miracula Artis, viii, 250

Miracula Natura, 250

Mirandula, Picus ‘de, 56, 278

Missive an die Hoch, Frat. des R.*.C.’., 220

Mitchell Papers, 484, 485

Mizraim, Rite of, 50x

Moltherus, G., 145, 236

Monas Hieroghyphica, 17, 18

| Montanus, 349

Morhot's Polyhistory, 347

Morley, Henry, 15

Mormius, Peter, 344, 347

Moseley, ‘Walter, 569, 570

Mosheim, J. L. von, 70, 107, 203; his Eeclesi-
astical History, ‘ib.

Mother Kilwinning, 4

Mountain, Invisible, 259, 381, 382

Mundus Christophori Filius, 248

Mundus Subterraneus, 354

| Miinsterische Beitrige zur Geschichtsforschung,
Ir

Murr, C. G. von, 41, 46, 48, 49, 350

Muse's Threnodta, 273

Mystéres de la Chevalerie, 32

Mysterium Arithmeticum, 224

Mythology, Three Books of Christian, 203-207,
217

Names, DivinE, 3, 56

Naometria, 44, 46, 47, 48, 49,50, 51, 71, 84, 102,
I14, 147, 153, 156, 192, 202, 211, 280, 307

Naudé, Gabriel, 27, 354, 357) 358

Neuhusius, Henricus, 243, 244

New Allantis, 25, 26, 32, 195, 389, 391, 392

New Encyclopedia of Freemasonry, 366, 417,

534

Nicolai, C. F., 10, 49, 348, 349, 350, 365, 435

Nicolas de Montaud, 76

Notes on the Scientifie and Religious Mysteries
of Antiquity, 7

Notes and Queries, American, 4

Novikoff, N., 531 ¢ seq.

Nuptials, Chemical, see Chymische Hochzeit

Occurta Puivosopuia of Orvius, 348

O'Kelly: Dictionnaire . . . de Blason, 92, 102

Opthaimia, 225

Order of the Golden Stone, 179, 343

Ordinal of Thomas Norton, 331, 369

Ordre des Chevaliers de P Aigie Noir, 428

Ordre Kabbalistique de la R..C.*., 596
ef seq.

Ormesus Magnus, 506

Ormuz, 5, 6, 7, 38

Ortholanus, II

Orvius, L. C., 348-351

PALMA TRIUMPHALIS, 353
Pandora Sexta Htatis, 258

7

-- Page 687 --
In

Papus, 366, 591, 597,599 _.

Papworth’s Alphabetical Dic. of Coats of Arms,
102

Paracelsus, A. T., 13, 14, 15, 34, 42, 56, 57, SI,
82, 83, 116, 133, 140, 236, 237, 241, 287,
305, 573, 588; his Prognosticatton, 13

Paris, Masonic Congress of, 493

Pasqually, Martines de, 501, 502, 529, 632

Paul, Grand Duke, 546, 547

Paulus de Didis, 219

Pegasus Firmamentt, 199, 229, 230

Péladan, Sar, 586, 597, 598

Pelican, 3x, 110, 111

Perfect and True Preparation, 24, 403 et seq. ;

413
Perfection, Rite of, 6, 425-434
Pernety, Abbé, 313, 491; his Dictionnaire
Mytho-Hermétique, 221
Petersen, J. W., 39, 113
Petrus de Mora, 87
Philadelphian Society, 296
Philalethes, Eugenius, see Thomas Vaughan
Philalethes, Eirenzus, 14
Philalethes, 7
Philosopher, Sublime or Unknown, 432
Philosophical Rite, 6
Pia et Utilissima Admonitio, 243
Pianco, Magister, ro, 442-445, 542, 549
Pillars J. and B., 83, 84, 444
Planets, Symbolic, 459 ef seq., 637
Platon, Metropolitan Archbishop, 546
Pontiff, Supreme, 152, 153
Postel, William, his Liber Jesivah, 278
Pott, Mrs- Henry, 21, 23, 24, 30, 32
Practica Leonis Viridis, 187
Priesthood, Rite of Elect, 529
Princes Chevaliers de R.*.C.”., 469-474, 632
Principles, Three Mystic, 460
Private Diary of Dr. Dee, 17
Procopius, 267
Prodromus F .". Ro. C.., 251, 332
Prognosticon Theologicum, 341
Pronaos of the Temple, 187
Pryce, F. Norman, xx, 212, 258

RainsForD PAPERS, 561, 562

Randolph, P. B., 569

Raptus Philosophicus, etc., 260

Ravenshaw, Rev. T. F., 565, 566

Raymund Lully, [iluminated Doctor, etc., 9

Realis Philosophia, 354

Redintegratio, ete., 233

Reghellini, his work on La Magonnerie, 10, 181,
203, 435

Regula Vita, 265

Relatio de quodam Peregrino, 236

Renaissance, New Light on the, 30, 31

Renatus, Sincerus, 7.e., Sigmund Richter, 24,
403, 418, 422, 439, 440

Renaudot, E., Conférences Publiques, 106

Renovateur dal Occultisme, Un, 600

Reparation, etc., 221

Repertorium der Litteratur, 39 et seq., 44, 45, 46,
48, 49, 51, 52, 113, 203, and Appendix

Responsum ad Fratres R..C .°. IMustres, 224

Respublica Christiana, 26, 209

Reuchlin, 56

Revelations of Divine Majesty, 72, 73

Rhenanus, 12

Riccius, 56
Richter, Sigmund, see Sincerus Renatus
Ripe Cimbrice . . . Descriptio, 5

Ripley, George, 76

Ros and Rosa, 106, 107, 109

Rosa Florescens, 245

Rosa Jesuitica, 235

Rosarium Novum Olympicum et Benedictum, 97
Rosartum Philosophorum, 9, 97, 331

6.

Lex

Rose@ Crucis Frater Thrasonico-Mendax, 248,

249
Rose, Christian, 346, 347, 348
Rose, Jacob, 347
Rose, Romance of the, 92, 93
Rose and Cross, 43, 48, 55, 59, 60, 61, 73, 323.
See also 85-112 passim.
Rose-Crotzx, La, 588
Rose-Croix, Masonic Degree of, 6, 362, 425-434,
446, 453, 50%
Rose Garden of Lauvin, 92
Rose of Dante, 93-95, 635
Rose of Khunrath, 66, 67, 95, 96
Rose of Sharon, 87, 88, 108, 428
Rose of Studion, 45
Rosenkreurer und Freimaurer Ordens, 49
Rosenroth, Baron Knorr von, 70, 90
Rosicrucian and Masonic Record, 15
Rosicrucian Brotherhood of Manchester, 563,
564, 638
Rosicrucian Cipher, 583
Rosicrucian Controversy, 316
Rosicrucian Grades, Late, 446, 449 et seq., 456,
466, 542, 543
Rosicrucian Hopes, 598
Rosicrucian Laboratory, 498
Rosicrucian Philosopher, Diary of, 559, 560
Rosicrucian Letter to a German Postulant, 299
Rosicrucian Physic, New Method of 393
Rosicrucian Unveiled, The, 10, 55, 442-445, 542,
545,549
Rosicrucians, Real History of the, 186, 361
Rosicrucians, The, 12, 32, 33, 114, 123,153
Rosie Crucian Infallible Axtomata, 392
Rosy Cross, Laws of the, 24, 304, 327, 328, 403-
4ur
Rosy Cross, President of the, 308, 309
Royal Arch, 436
_ Royal Order of Scotland, 432, 563
Rudd MSS., 17, 18, 398-401
SABBATH, BLACK, 593
Saint- Germain, Comte de, 19, 484 et seg.
Saint Martin, LC. de, 73, 529
Sapiens and his testimony, 376-378
Sattler, C. F., 40
Saunier, Mare, rro
Schelling, Jacob, 225
Schmeider's Geschichte der Alchimie, 434
Schnelle Botschafft an die Phil. Frat, vom
R..C.., 222
Schréder, Baron, F, J. W., 540
Schréder, Baron F. L., 540
Schwarz, J. G., 533, 534, 535, 536, 539
Schweighardt, Theophilus, 246, 258, 259, 268,

332

Scottish Philosophical Rite, 6, 7,632, 633

Scriptum Amicabtle, 341

Scrutinium Chymicum, 331

Secret Doctrine in Israel, go

Secret Societies of all Ages and Countries, 9

Secret Symbols of the Rosicrucians, 27, 100, 106,
351, 475-482, 581, 620

Secret Tradition in Christian Times, 293, 441—
443, 513, 514, 622

Secret Tribunal, 36

Sédir, 7, 9, 74, 81, 146, 267, 349, 589, 598

Semler, Solomon, 9, 70, 75, 81, 116, 435,

Sendbrief an die Herren des... Re C.".,223
Sendivogius, Michael, 414, 415
Sendschreiben an die... Briderschaft des

Ruw.C.., 2203 Sendschreiben an die
Rr Cry 223; Zwey Sendschreiben, 223;
Sendschreiben . . . an die Gottweise Frat.
».. des R..C.., 2213 Sendschreiben
oder Einfeltige Antwortandie .. Brid. .
dess R.‘.C."., 220; Sendschreiben of
Menapius, 267


-- Page 688 --
Index

Sephiroth, 96

Septimana Philosophica, 97, 330, 331

Serpentarius and Cygnus, 42, 149, 303

Shekinah, go, gr

Signatstern, Der, 526, 527

Silentium post Clamores, 318-323, 333

Sinnett, A. P., 20, 23

Sivertus, Johannes, 242

Soctetas Jesu et R.*.C.'., 234, 235

Societas Rosicrucianain Anglia, 7, 58, 308, 564~
567, 573, 582

Societas Rostcruciana in America, 615, 616

Soctetas Rubee Crucis, 573 -

Sophia Panaretos, 209

Sophia cum Moria Certamen, 294

Spanish Monarchy, of Campanella, 354

Speck auff der Fall, 248

Spectator, German, 440

Speculum Ambitionis, 269; Speculum Con-
stantia, 248; Speculum Sophicum Rhodo-
Stauroticum, 259

Sperber, Julius, 70, 116, 253, 254

Sphinx, Der, 12

Sphynx Rosacea, 267

Spiritual Healing, Mystery of, 3

Stanhope, Gilbert, 504, 505

Star Rising in the East, 570-580

Stellatus, Joseph, 199, 230, 231

Steiner, Rudolf, 627

Sthael Peter, 367

Stoddart, Miss A. M., 13, 42

Stone, Philosopher’s, 3, 65, 77, 239, 305, 312,

_ 405, 406, 442, 418, 455

Strict Observance, Rite of the, 423, 497, 530,
533, 54%, 544, 637

Studion, Simon, 39-43, 47, 48, 50, 101, 112, 113,
156, 192, 202, 208, 211, 280, 287, 307, 421.
See also Appendix for Siudion, Naometria
and Militia

Summum Bonum, 108, 294-301, 379, 380

Swedish Rite, 530 oo.

Sylloge, an Hostia sit Verus Cibarius, 241

Symbola Aure@ Mensa, 105, 311, 318, 324-327,
333,444 . .

Symbolum Physico-Chemicum, 64

Sypesteyn, J. van, 490, 492

Tarot SYMBOLISM, 583

Tartarum Philosophicum, 100

Tauler, 74, 247

Taxil, Leo, 269, 383, 386 .

Templar, Knights, 38, 100 ; Masonic Templars,
563

Terpagu, Petrus, 5

Testament of Abbot Cremer, 331 .

Testamentum Magistri Raymundi Lullii, 8

Tetras Chymiatrica, 258

Theatrum Chemicum, 1X | .

Theatrum Chemicum Britannicum, 368, 369,
371, 437

Themis Aurea, 35, 320, 327-330, 333, 375

Themistius de Melampage, J., 235

Theodosius Verax, 386-389

Theologia Germanica, 73, 213, 247, 357

Theomagia, or the Temple of Wisdom, 393

Theophilus Calnatus, 386-389 .

Theosophical Review, 6, 529; Theosophical
Siftings, 6 fet:

‘Hneosophical Society, 19 . .
Thosaurinella Olympica Aurea Tripariita, 80
Thesaurum Fider, 265

Thesauru
Thiébault
Thirty ¥
Thory, 6,
Tintinnat
Tractatus
Tractatus
Tractatus
Transcena
65
Transmut
Trithemit
True and |
Tschirnes:
Turba Ph
Turris Ba
Twining, |
Typotius,

UuysseEs,

Unknown

Universal
18x

VAUGHAN,
Vaughan,
292, 3
537, 5
300, 3
Verum Int
Vincent, C
Vindicia |
Vita ab ip
et seq.
Voltaire, 4

Waite, A.
Walpole, f
Warnung f
Way to Bi
Weber, Kz
Wehe, Zin
Weigel, Va
Weisse, F.
Westcott,
140, 2
Westerode
White, W.
Wigston, \
204, 3
Wilder, Al
Wilhelmsb
Wilkoroki,
William of
Wirth, Osv
Wise Man’
Wohlgemey
des R.
W6llner, J.
540, 5.
Wood, Ant
Woodford,
Woodman,
Word, 433,
Wright, W

YARKER, J
43554

ZINNENDO}
Zohar, Sep
278, 2:

s Thesaurorum, 70, 634, 635

's Souvenirs, 491

ars’ War, 195, 341, 355

7,9, 60, 349, 425, 448

tilum Sophorum, 250, 332

A pologeticus, 281, 284-289, 292
Errantium, 343
Theologo-Philosophicus, 289-292, 305
ental Magic, its Doctrine and Ritual,

ation of Metals, see Stone

IS, 15, 34

Faithful Relation, 17
s, Valentin, 222
ilosophorum, 10, 231
bel, 192, 201-203
Louisa, ror

Jac., 103, 104

331, 332
World, The, 352
Reformation, 117-122, 144,147,159,

Diana, 383, 385

Thomas, 15, 19, 30, 63, 109, 154, 155,
00, 301, 365, 372-387, 389, 395, 531,
70,580; Works of Thomas Vaughan,
92, 537

entum, 330, 333

ount St., 52-54

Rhodostaurotice, ete., 248

so conscripta by J. V. Andres, 182

go

Eo9
Torace, his Letters, 489, 490
wir der Rosenkreutzer Ungerziefer, 342,
ss, The, 368
ir] von, 492
pert, 250
lentin, 71, 72, 73, 114, 200, 332

G. E., 445
Dr. W. Wynn, 19, 123, 124, 127, 131,
74,275, 276, 565, 566, 567, 582
, Baron de, $5, 6, 7, 456

H., 564
V.F.C., 24, 25, 28, 29, 41, 102, 109,
13,435; his Baconian Writings, 25
exander, Dr., 116, 296, 297
ad, Congress of, 493, 533

Count, 508, 525

Tyre, 130
vald, 438
s Crown, The, 394, 437
ntes Ausschreiben an die Hoch. Frat,
'.C.°., 223

C., 504, 505, 597, 533, 534, 536, 539,
13, 6x8
hony 4, 367

Rev. A. F. A., 582, 583

Dr., 582

439, 444, 448, 456, 629, 630

W., 568

OHN, 7, 9, 14, 15, 37, 103, 109, 330,
37, 501, 634

uF, RITE OF, 530
her Ha, 10, 56, 89, 90, 9x, 98, 102,
0, 443, 591, 624

THEOLE 2 * '5RARY
CLAREMU..,, CALIF.

WICKS

-- Page 690 --
A Selection from the Works of
Arthur Edward Waite
THE WAY OF DIVINE UNION
Being a Doctrine of Experience in the life of Sanctity, considered
on the faith of its testimonies and interpreted after a new manner.
By ARTHUR Epwarp Walts, Author of The Secret Doctrine in
Usvael, The Hidden Church of the Holy Graal, etc. etc. Demy 8vo,
cloth gilt, 336 pp., 7s. 6d. net.
THE COLLECTED POEMS OF ARTHUR EDWARD
WAITE
Including ‘“‘ A Book of Mystery and Vision,’’ ‘‘ Strange Houses
of Sleep,”’ “ A Soul’s Comedy,” etc. In Two Volumes, artistically
bound in cloth gilt, xxxvi + 354 pp., and xii + 352 pp., with a
new Portrait, 21s. net.
TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC
Its Doctrine, Practice and Ritual.
By Exrpxas Lévi. Translated, Annotated and Introduced by
ARTHUR EDWaRD WAITE. 9 in. X 6 in., with all the original
plates and Portrait, cloth gilt, 25s. net; vellum, 35s. net.

Mr. Waite’s translation of Eliphas Lévi’s Magnum Opus appeared originally in 1895
and is in continual demand among students of esoteric philosophy. In the present
edition the text has been revised throughout and elucidatory notes have been added,
the material being drawn mainly from other expository writings of the French Magus,
scarcely any of which are available in English.

THE HISTORY OF MAGIC
Including a clear and precise exposition of its Processes, Rites and
Mysteries.
By Exipxas Lévi. Translated, annotated and introduced by
ARTHUR EpwarD WAITE. 9 in. X 6in. Blue cloth, gilt, gilt tops,
572 pp., with 20 plates. Second Edition, 21s. net.

* Asa translator, Mr. A. E, Waite brings with him many rare qualifications, and of
these he now offers further proof in The History of Magic, by Eliphas Lévi, which,
with the illuminating preface and notes, must be considered the best English version
we are ever likely to get of this ‘ opus hierarchicum et catholicum.’”’—Sunday Times.
THE TURBA PHILOSOPHORUM

Or Assembly of the Sages. An Ancient Alchemical Treatise, with
the chief Readings of the Shorter Codex, Parallels from Greek
Alchemists, and Explanations of obscure terms.

Translated, with Introduction and Notes, by A. E. Warts.
Crown 8vo, 65. net.

This work ranks next to Geber as a fountain-head of alchemy in Western Europe.
RAYMUND LULLY

Jluminated Doctor, Alchemist and Christian Mystic.
By ARTHUR EDWARD Waite. Limp cloth, ts. 6d. net.

“Mr. Waite’s handling of a subject which has baffled many students is masterly, and

sheds light in many hitherto. dark places,”—-Liverpool Weekly Post.
LOUIS CLAUDE DE SAINT-MARTIN

The French Mystic, and the Story of Modern Martinism.

By ARTHUR Epwarp Waite. Limp cloth, ts. 6d. net.
LE
WILLIAM RIDER & SON, Lid., 8 Paternoster Row, London, E.C.4

-- Page 691 --
RIDER’ S MASONI

A NEW ENCYCLOPAEDI
{Ars Magna

AND oF CoGNaTE INSTITUTED Mys-’
AND Hi

By ARTHUR EpwaRpD WAITE
Warden of Iowa, etc. Autho
masonry, etc. etc. With sixte
trations in the text. Two vol

and pp. iv+ 488). Blue cloth
“There is evidence to spare in Mr. Waite
those people who have sought to make their
key which alone can open a passage through
slopes of the sacred mountain. There are ot
this ‘New Encyclopedia ’ wil] be useful.”’—
“ Two interesting and absorbing volumes
and representing all that is known on the s1
‘Two sumptuous volumes... . The Te
spectus of Cross References are very useful.”

THE MEANING OF MAS
By W. L. WitmsHurst, P.M.

ContENTS,—Introduction—-The Position
Deeper Symbolism of Masonry—Masonry as
Relation of Masonry to the Ancient Mysteri

“ Among Freemasons it will be conceded
work, The book is distinguished by patien
literary style... . Mr. Wilmshurst carrics
the Masonic Art.”— Yorkshire Post,

MASONIC LEGENDS AN
By DupLEy WricHT. Crown 8
5s. net.

‘* A book acceptable alike to the trifler an
“ He tells of the Temple of Solomon, of tk

and refreshes us at the perennial! springs of ar
Weekly Post.

WOMAN AND FREEMAS

By DupLtey WricHt. Crown

ConTENTS.—Introduction—Adoptive Ma
and Count Cagliostro—Ritual of Adoptive M:
Women Freemasons—Order of the Eastern
Grand Orient of the Netherlands on the Que

“ Here is a book that should bein every Ma:

“To students of rituals certain of Mr. W:
The Times,

ROMAN CATHOLICISM
By DuDLEY WricHT. Demy §

This is an historical not a controversial w
of the official Bulls, Allocutions, Encyclical |
by Popes and Bishops, as well as the offic
Freemasons in the Inquisition. Incidentall}
the history of Freemasonry in the United Ki
gives particulars of many secret societies int
initiated. The facts are given without embe
Tange covered by the work extends over two
the seventeenth century and carried up to t

FREEMASONRY: ITS Al

By J. S. M. Warp, B.A., F.S

masonry and the Ancient Gods, ¢
Contents: Part I.—The Ideals of Fre
Ideal—The Ritualistic Ideal—The Archexo
Ideal—What Mysticism is—Conclusions.
Masonry—The “ Black” Lodges—The Int
masonry and Established Religions—The Gra
Grand Lodge.
This work may be broadly regarded as a
masonry. It gives a comprehensive review o

Many questions of paramount importance }
institution.

ee
WILLIAM RIDER & SON, Ltd., §

C PUBLICATIONS

‘A OF FREEMASONRY
Latomorunt).

[TERIES, THEIR RITES, LITERATURE,
[STORY.

, P.M., P.Z., Past Senior Grand
r of The Secret Tradition in Free-
en full-page plates and many Illus-
umes, Royal 8vo (pp. xxxii +458,
gilt, 42s. net.

’s crudite pages of the folly and obstinacy of
‘own paths to the Temple Gate without the
the mystic labyrinth which guards the upper
hers who really seck. . . . For such as these
The Times.

, embodying the results of the latest research
ibject.”-—The Bookseller.

chnology of Rites and Grades, and the con-
—The Masonic Record.

ONRY
Demy 8vo, cloth, Ios. 6d.

and Possibilities of the Masonic Order—The
a Philosophy--The Holy Royal Arch—The

eS.
that the author has justified the title of his
t research, erudition, lofty ideals, and good
one far beyond the ordinary conception of

D TRADITIONS
vo, cloth. Tlustrated Frontispiece.

d the student.’’—The Co-Mason.
e Queen of Sheba, and Hiram, King of Tyre,
icient romance and mystery.’’—Birminghan:

N
ONRY

8vo, cloth, 6s. net.

sonry—The Fendeurs—Egyptian Masonry
asonry—Ritual of Freemasonry for Ladics—
| Star—Modern Female Freemasonry—The
stion.

sonic Library.’’—The Square, Vancouver,B.C.
right’s pages will prove of great interest.”"—

LND FREEMASONRY

3vo, cloth, ros. 6d. net.

ork, The volume contains a full translation
Letters, and Decrees issued against the craft
ial records of the sufferings imposed upon
rit throws many interesting sidelights upon
ngdom and on the Continent of Europe, and
o which only Catholics were permitted to be
llishment; they speak for themselves. The
centuries, beginning with the latter part of
he present day.

IMS AND IDEALS

.S., F.R.Econ.S. Author of Free-
stc. Demy 8vo, cloth, 10s,6d. net.

smasonry—The Political Ideal—The Social
logical Ideal—The Mystical and Religious
Part II.—Grave Problems—Women and
ernational Aspect of Freemasonry—Free-
nd Ideal—The Formation of an International

statement of the position and aims of Free-
f Masonry in the past and present, and raises
n reference to the immediate future of the

} Paternoster Row, London, E.C.4


